APEC Calls for 'Concrete' Steps on Asia Free Trade  
Asia-Pacific leaders said they will take "concrete steps" toward creating a "comprehensive" regional free-trade agreement, without setting a target for achieving that goal.
"We reaffirm our unwavering commitment to achieving free and open trade and investment in the region," the heads of the 21-member Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum said today in a statement in Yokohama, Japan. 
"We will work to address non- tariff barriers to trade, including by increasing regulatory cooperation."
The gathering, attended by the leaders of the U.S., China, Japan and Russia, marked the conclusion of four days of summit talks that highlighted divisions over global imbalances. 
The Group of 20 on Nov. 12 in Seoul pledged to "oppose protectionist trade actions" while failing to agree on a remedy for trade and investment distortions.
Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan said APEC, which accounts for more than 50 percent of the global economy and almost 45 percent of its trade, "will move forward to make the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific a reality."
Divisions Persist
Still, divisions among the member countries persisted. 
Chinese President Hu Jintao indicated no change in his country's currency policy a day after U.S. President Barack Obama in Seoul called the yuan "undervalued." Kan yesterday met with Hu and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev over separate territorial disputes, and while all sides agreed on improving ties, no concessions were forthcoming.
APEC leaders said the region "is recovering from the recent economic and financial crisis, but uncertainty remains." 
Echoing the G-20 statement, the group called for greater currency flexibility and warned against volatile movement in the foreign exchange market that can disrupt economic growth.
'Market-Determined' 
"We will move toward more market-determined exchange rate systems" and "refrain from competitive devaluation of currencies," the statement said. 
Advanced countries will be vigilant to "help mitigate the risk of excessive volatility in capital flows facing some emerging market economies."
The group agreed on building trade through regional groups including the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and negotiations such as the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Kan, who favors joining the TPP talks, faces resistance from his own party amid a backlash from Japan's farmers who benefit from tariff protection. 
His Cabinet last week agreed only to begin preliminary discussions on the negotiations, a move Obama told Kan he "very much welcomed."
Obama flies home today having fallen short in some of his goals during his 10-day Asian trip. 
He failed to secure a G-20 agreement on concrete steps to rebalance the global economy, and had to extend talks on securing a South Korean trade deal central to his goal of boosting U.S. exports.
