Pirates attempt hijack of another US ship off Somalia coast 
Pirates fired rocket-propelled grenades and automatic weapons at an American ship carrying humanitarian aid off the coast of Somalia in the fifth attack on a commercial vessel since the US Navy's rescue of a captured freighter captain.
The MV Liberty Sun was today heading to Kenya with a US Navy escort after the pirates' unsuccessful attempt to seize the cargo vessel and its 20-strong American crew, none of whom were reported injured.
"We are under attack by pirates, we are being hit by rockets. Also bullets," one crewman, 26-year-old Thomas Urbik, wrote in an email to his mother. "We are barricaded in the engine room and so far no one is hurt. 
[A] rocket penetrated the bulkhead but the hole is small. 
Small fire, too, but put out."
The ship, which suffered some damage in the incident yesterday, "conducted evasive manoeuvres" to ward off the pirates before the destroyer USS Bainbridge arrived in response to an emergency call, a US Navy spokesman said. 
The pirate vessel fled before the Navy ship arrived.
The Bainbridge is the ship from which US Navy snipers killed three pirates who were holding Richard Phillips, the captain of the freighter Maersk Alabama, on board a drifting lifeboat. 
A fourth pirate was captured in the operation on Sunday. 
Phillips had been held for five days after exchanging himself to safeguard his crew.
Phillips, who is now due to return to America, was on board the Bainbridge when it arrived to help the Liberty Sun.
While President Barack Obama has vowed to end the pirates' almost unchallenged ability to capture ships at will in the busy waters of the Gulf of Aden, their vessels have seized four ships and about 60 hostages in the region since Phillips was rescued.
During a rare night-time attack, pirates seized a Greek-managed cargo ship, MV Irene EM, before dawn yesterday. 
Soon afterwards they boarded a Lebanese-owned cargo ship, MV Sea Horse. 
Over the preceding two days, pirates had taken over two Egyptian fishing trawlers.
"Our latest hijackings are meant to show that no one can deter us from protecting our waters from the enemy because we believe in dying for our land," one pirate, Omar Dahir Idle, told the AP news agency from the Somali coastal town of Harardhere.
The Liberty Sun, which set off from Houston, had already delivered thousands of tonnes of food aid to a port in Sudan and was en route to deliver more aid to Mombasa.
After a relative lull during rough sea conditions at the start of the year, since the end of February pirates off Somalia have attacked at least 78 ships and currently hold 16 vessels, with more than 300 hostages. 
Crews are usually freed after a ransom is paid.
While navy boats from a number of countries are patrolling the area, there are too many merchant vessels around the Gulf of Aden for them to be an effective deterrent. 
The Gulf, which links the Suez Canal and the Red Sea to the Indian Ocean, is the shortest route from Asia to Europe and is one of the world's busiest shipping lanes.
