Obama sets out world agenda as White House team move in 
The new Obama administration is willing to talk to Iran "without preconditions" and will work towards the abolition of nuclear weapons, the White House said yesterday.
The new foreign policy initiatives appeared on the White House website as the team worked quickly to set out its agenda.
While there is continuity in some areas, notably the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, there are sharp departures in others.
Iran
The Obama foreign policy agenda that appeared on the White House website declared: "Barack Obama supports tough and direct diplomacy with Iran without preconditions." 
The Bush administration made direct talks between the US and Iran conditional on Iranian suspension of its uranium enrichment programme.
The only exception was some discussion in Baghdad on the future of Iraq.
The Obama initiative represents a distinct break from that policy, as part of a fundamental shift in diplomatic approach.
The Obama agenda said the new administration would "talk to our foes and friends" and not set preconditions.
However, any talks with Iran will put on the table the same deal that the international community has been trying to get Tehran to accept for the past four years: extensive economic and diplomatic help if uranium enrichment is suspended, further economic pressure and diplomatic isolation if it is not.
Iran has resisted this carrot-and-stick approach so far, despite four sets of UN sanctions, but western diplomats hope that direct engagement by Washington will help break the impasse by opening up the possibility of a "grand bargain" addressing other regional and international issues.
"In carrying out this diplomacy, we will co-ordinate closely with our allies and proceed with careful preparation," the White House said."Seeking this kind of comprehensive settlement with Iran is our best way to make progress."
Nuclear
The other notable shift in US foreign policy announced yesterday was a strategic decision to move towards a "nuclear-free world" through bilateral and multilateral disarmament.
"Obama and [the vice-president Joe] Biden will set a goal of a world without nuclear weapons, and pursue it," according to the agenda.
It is a long-term goal. The US will maintain a "strong deterrent as long as nuclear weapons exist", but begin to take steps on the "long road towards eliminating nuclear weapons".
The development of new nuclear weapons will be stopped, a sharp change from the Bush administration, which pushed for a new generation of warheads, and the new administration will work with Moscow to take US and Russian missiles off their current hair-trigger alert, while seeking "dramatic reductions in US and Russian stockpiles of nuclear weapons and material".
Meanwhile, the administration aims to secure all "loose" nuclear material around the world in its first term.
There are US programmes already under way to shift fissile material from former Soviet bloc countries, where security is often slack, back to Russia for conversion to less dangerous, low-enriched nuclear fuel.
This initiative will accelerate those programmes.
The new nuclear agenda is closely in tune with British policy since, in 2007, the then foreign secretary Margaret Beckett announced backing for nuclear abolition.
The UK claims to have reduced the total explosive power of its nuclear arsenal by 75%.
A new foreign policy paper due to be made public next month lays out methods for the world to reduce the risk of proliferation, and work towards a nuclear-free world, particularly by increasing international confidence in verification techniques so that nations can be sure their rivals are not secretly arming.
Energy security
Washington plans to reduce US dependence on oil through a $150bn investment in renewable and alternative energies over the next 10 years, hoping to "create millions of jobs along the way".
Obama also plans to make the US a "leader" in the global effort to combat climate change at the head of an international partnership, presumably a reference to the UN process to find a successor treaty to the Kyoto accords.
Israel-Palestine
There is little comfort for the Palestinians in the strategy laid out yesterday, which combines promotion of a two-state solution with strong support for Israel's security, described as "our first and incontrovertible commitment in the Middle East".
The US "will never distance itself from Israel".
The policy document declares it backs Israel's "right to self defence" in the case of the 2006 Lebanon war, and does not mention the recent Gaza incursions at all.
Achieving a two-state settlement will be "a key diplomatic priority from day one".
