US offers automakers $13.4 bln lifeline 
The US government agreed Friday to an emergency loan of 13.4 billion dollars to ailing automakers to stave off collapse of the sector that could deal a crippling blow to the economy.
The rescue announced could include up to four billion dollars more pending congressional approval.
General Motors and Chrysler were expected to draw on the funds immediately to avert bankruptcy, and will be required to implement new belt-tightening moves and demonstrate their long-term viability.
"These are not ordinary circumstances," President George W. Bush said in announcing the aid."In the midst of a crisis and a recession allowing the US auto industry to collapse is not a responsible course of action."
The funds will be drawn from the Treasury's 700 billion dollar Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP).
An additional four billion dollars from the TARP will be available in February, contingent upon congressional approval of the second portion of that program.
The automakers will have to take steps to demonstrate their viability by March 31.
"The automakers and unions must understand what is at stake and make hard decisions necessary to reform," Bush said. "We intend to send a clear message to everyone involved in the future of American automakers."
He added that restructuring the industry would "require meaningful concessions from all involved in the auto industry." 
Among the "targets" established by the loan would be a two-thirds reduction in debt by exchanging debt for equity, more flexible work rules and cuts in wages to make the companies competitive with foreign manufacturers established on US soil.
"The loan will be automatically called by the government and will be repaid in full if certain conditions are not met" by March 31, a senior administration official said.
"The most important one is that the firms must be viable." 
The official added that "this does not mean the firms has to be profitable but clearly ... the firms have to be profitable soon." 
Chrysler LLC chairman and chief executive Bob Nardelli a letter of intent for the loan had been signed.
"These requirements will require consideration from all constituents, requiring commitment first in principal, leading to implementation this coming year," Nardelli said.
"Chrysler is committed to meeting these requirements." 
General Motors lauded the action and said in a statement: "This action helps to preserve many jobs, and supports the continued operation of GM and the many suppliers, dealers and small businesses across the country that depend on us."
GM added: "This will allow us to accelerate the completion of our aggressive restructuring plan for long-term, sustainable success." 
The administration official said the loan would be managed by the US Treasury and that no "car czar" would be appointed, but that president-elect Barack Obama would be allowed to designate one after taking office January 20.
"We have kept them (the Obama transition team) informed throughout the process," the official said.
The official added that the plan did not cover the financial arms of the auto firms, which also are facing distress from the credit crunch and weak economy.
Mired in heavy losses and deep in debt, the Big Three automakers had asked earlier for a government rescue to help weather the economic crisis after Congress refused a bailout in a dispute over union wages.
The firms have repeatedly warned that without a package of loans, millions of jobs could be lost, which they say would have devastating effects for the nation's already stumbling economy.
Chrysler said Thursday it was closing its American units for a month from Friday after GM announced it was idling 30 percent of its North American production "in response to rapidly deteriorating market conditions."
Bush had faced pressure to act before the Christmas and New Year holidays while White House officials had warned bankruptcy was one of the options being considered.
