Barack Obama condemns 'unjust' crackdown on Iran protests 
Barack Obama condemned for the first time the violence in Iran, saying today that he was appalled and outraged by Tehran's crackdown on protesters. 
After a week of reticence, the US president went far beyond his previous expressions of sympathy with the demonstrators.
"The United States and the international community have been appalled and outraged by the threats, beatings, and imprisonments of the last few days," he said. "I strongly condemn these unjust actions, and I join with the American people in mourning each and every innocent life that is lost."
Obama spoke of the "searing image" of the dying moments of Neda ? Soltan, a young female protester shot by a sniper and now an icon of the revolt. 
He said the demonstrators would ultimately be seen to have been "on the right side of history". The regime's accusations against foreigners were "an obvious attempt to distract people from what is truly taking place within Iran's borders".
He added: "This tired strategy of using old tensions to scapegoat other countries won't work any more in Iran." 
Obama conceded, however, that the events in Iran since the elections had damaged his strategy of detente with Tehran, which were aimed at breaking the international impasse over Iran's nuclear programme. 
"What we have seen in recent weeks is not encouraging," he said.
His intervention came as a spy row erupted between Britain and Iran after Tehran expelled two British diplomats on allegations of espionage, and Gordon Brown retaliated by ordering out two Iranian diplomats.
The prime minister announced the tit-for-tat expulsions in the Commons as relations between the two countries reached a dangerous new low, in the wake of 11 days of anti-government protests inside Iran over the disputed election results.
The Foreign Office said the Iranian government's policy of singling out Britain for blame over the unrest was "absurd" and put its diplomats at risk. 
Relatives of embassy staff were being evacuated as a few hundred pro-government activists demonstrated outside the embassy compound in central Tehran, burning British, Israeli and American flags, and pelting the building with eggs and tomatoes.
The embattled government in Tehran has increasingly lashed out against its foreign critics, including the US, western European states and the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon. 
But it has directed particular venom at Britain.
The past few days have seen a crescendo of anti-British rhetoric on Iranian state media, culminating in Tehran's order to expel the two British diplomats for "activities incompatible with their diplomatic status" --- an official euphemism for spying. 
The Iranian foreign minister, Manouchehr Mottaki, claimed "British spies" had been sent to manipulate the elections.
Brown said the allegations were "absolutely without foundation". 
The prime minister said: "In response to that action, we informed the Iranian ambassador today that we would expel two Iranian diplomats from their embassy in London. 
I am disappointed that Iran has placed us in this position." A Downing Street official said Tehran told Britain on Monday about its intention to expel the two British diplomats, who have not been named.
Today the Iranian ambassador to London, Rasoul Movahedian, was summoned to meet the Foreign Office permanent under-secretary, Sir Peter Ricketts, and was informed of the retaliatory action. 
According to UK government sources, the two Iranians, who have also not been identified, were selected for expulsion because their ranks matched that of the two expelled Britons; it was not necessarily for their being suspected of espionage. 
Both sets of diplomats had been given a week to leave their posts.
The expulsions coincide with a ferocious Iranian government backlash against the protesters, who have claimed that the presidential elections of 12 June were rigged to give the president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, a landslide.
Thousands of riot police and basij militia have patrolled Tehran' streets, beating demonstrators and, in some cases, shooting them. 
According to official figures, 17 opposition supporters have been killed.
The authorities continued to waver yesterday over declaring the official results final. 
The supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, issued a five-day extension to the deadline for the guardian council, a senior body of clerics, to complete an investigation into the poll and ratify the result. 
However, the council said yesterday it had found no evidence of irregularities that would affect the poll's outcome.
Severe reporting restrictions have made it difficult to assess the level of unrest around Iran, but anecdotal reports today suggested that the heavy presence of security forces had succeeded in dispersing supporters of the opposition candidate, Mir Hossein Mousavi, who resorted to more passive forms of protest. 
Mousavi and his wife, Zahra Rahnavard, were reported to be planning a peaceful demonstration outside parliament tomorrow to coincide with the guardian council's official report on the elections.
The campaign against Britain took off on Friday, when Khamenei lashed out against foreign "enemies" and declared the British government "the most evil of them".
The BBC also became a target, with the expulsion of its resident correspondent, John Leyne, on Sunday.
Today, Iranian state television showed interviews with "protesters", who "confessed" to being under the influence of the BBC and the Voice of America.
A Foreign Office spokeswoman said yesterday: "The repeated allegations levelled against the UK are absurd, and do not stand up to scrutiny. 
We are categorical that the result of the Iranian election is a matter for the Iranian people."
The spokeswoman added: "The government of Iran is seeking to blame the UK and other outsiders for what is an Iranian reaction to an Iranian issue. 
This has a potential impact on our staff's safety and is unacceptable. 
We have therefore taken the decision to reciprocate."
Iranian distrust of British motives dates back to the colonial era, when Britain controlled the Iranian oil industry. 
British intelligence also played a part in the overthrow of the elected government of Mohammad Mosaddegh in 1953.
The Treasury's announcement last week that it had blocked ?1bn in Iranian assets under UN and EU sanctions caused consternation in Iran's parliament, where the measures were declared illegal.
A Foreign Office official said: "We have always been clear that we seek a constructive bilateral relationship with Iran, based on mutual respect. 
Iran's decision to try to turn what are internal matters for Iran into a conflict with the UK --- and others --- is deeply regrettable and without foundation in fact. 
Whether a constructive relationship is possible depends on Iran."
