US aims for bilateral climate change deals with China and Indian 
Fresh commitments may breathe life back into Copenhagen deal as India prepares to announce cap and trade scheme.
The Obama administration is hoping to win new commitments to fight global warming from China and India in back-to-back summits next month, the Guardian has learned, including the first Indian emissions trading scheme.
The US hopes the new commitments will breathe life into the moribund negotiations to seal a global treaty on climate change in Copenhagen in December, by setting out what action each country will take. 
But many observers say such bilateral deals also risk seriously weakening any Copenhagen agreement by allowing the idea of a global limit on greenhouse gas emissions to be abandoned.
The US's twin diplomatic push will see Barack Obama meeting China's president Hu Jintao in Beijing on November 16-17 before playing host to India's prime minister Manmohan Singh at the White House on November 24. 
The visits appear timed to provide a much-needed boost to a proposed law to reduce US emissions now before the Senate, as well as to the Copenhagen talks.
At preparatory UN talks in Bangkok earlier this month, the US and other rich countries were accused by a group of 131 nations of trying to "fundamentally sabotage" the Kyoto protocol, which the group said must be the basis for its successor. 
Kyoto --- which made no demands on developing countries and which the US refused to ratify --- remains political kryptonite in Washington. 
The US wants to move away from a legally binding global agreement to one where individual countries pledge cuts in their national emissions.
The state department envoy, Todd Stern, believes strongly that separate bilateral agreements with countries such as China, India, Russia and Brazil are the building blocks to an agreement at Copenhagen. 
But adoption of national action plans is hazardous say others, as there would be little clear idea of whether together they would avoid dangerous global warming.
US officials are hopeful that breakthroughs with India and China could still provide the underpinnings for at least a limited deal at Copenhagen. 
"China and India are both critically important to achieving our international goals on carbon reduction. 
We need them as part the system," said Senator Ben Cardin, a Maryland Democrat who serves on the foreign and environment and public works committees. 
"There has already been a lot of work done between US and China, and there is going to be more work done next month with President Obama going to China."
Indian officials are looking to their prime minister's visit to Washington to replicate an energy agreement signed between the US and China in July. 
India wants help in speeding its adoption of new, greener technologies and expanding its use of solar power.There is also interest in research co-operation, especially on carbon capture technologies, which hopes to trap greenhouse gases from power plants and bury them. 
"It would be like the memorandum of understanding with China," said Jairam Ramesh, India's environment minister.
In response, on India is preparing to unveil new measures to reduce its surging growth of greenhouse gas emissions: its own version of a carbon cap-and-trade scheme, in which polluters can buy and sell emissions permits, and a new solar project.
"We are going to introduce a domestic cap-and-trade programme, but the cap will be on energy intensity, not carbon," said Ramesh. 
This would limit how much carbon can be emitted for each unit of energy produced, which will slow the rise of emissions rather than cutting them back, and allow the Indian economy to continue to grow and alleviate poverty.
He said the legislation to establish the scheme would be introduced before Singh's visit to Washington, with a vote in the Indian parliament by the end of the year: "By December it will be done." 
India is also pushing for a relaxation of international patents on green technology. 
"Unless you adjust the intellectual property rights, how do you bring about rapid defusion," said Shyam Saran, India's climate change envoy.
US officials say they are looking to Obama's visit to Beijing to produce concrete commitments from China on how it would reduce its large and rapidly rising emissions. 
President Hu announced at a UN summit last month that China would reduce energy intensity by "notable margins".
