NASA Finds Smallest Earthlike Planet Outside Solar System 
Rocky world 1.4 times Earth's size is "missing link " astronomer says. 
The smallest planet yet spied outside our solar system has been found orbiting a sunlike star about 560 light-years away astronomers announced today. 
Known as Kepler-10b the planet is just 1.4 times Earth's size and 4.6 times its mass.
The planet found using NASA's Kepler spacecraft is the first of the more than 500 known exoplanets that's definitively rocky? much like Earth Mars Venus or Mercury? the study team says. 
Launched in March 2009 Kepler was designed to hunt for potentially habitable Earthlike planets.
Astronomers have been studying Kepler-10b since its discovery in 2009 when the team detected a periodic dimming of the host star as the planet passed in front of the star.
Finding such a small planet this way was no easy feat? seen from a similar distance Earthpassing in front of the sun would cause a 0.01 percent reduction in the star's brightness said Natalie Batalha of San Jose State University lead author of an upcoming paper describing the find. 
"Imagine you have 10 000 light bulbs and you take one away. That's the change in brghtness we're looking for " Batalha said today during a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle Washington. 
Still after using Kepler and other instruments to precisely calculate the new planet's size mass and density Batalha said "we know without question that this is a rocky world." 
Smallest Planet Has Density of Iron 
Before figuring out the nature of Kepler-10b the scientists looked at the host star's properties as revealed by starquakes acoustic disturbances that make the entire star ring like a bell. 
"In the same way that we use a sonogram to probe an unborn fetus and earthquakes to probe the interior of the Earth we use starquakes to probe the interior structure and properties of the star itself " Batalha said. 
"A tiny star would yield different [vibration] frequencies than a large one just as when you strum a violin you're going to get a different sound than when you strum a cello." ?
"Using starquakes Batalha and colleagues were able to accurately determine the size mass and age of the star which in turn allowed them to make very fine-tuned estimates of the new planet's characteristics. 
Astronomers carefully studied the tiny variations in starlight to determine Kepler-10b's size. 
The observations also revealed that the planet is very close to the star orbiting once every 20 hours. 
Using the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii the Kepler team made precise measurements of minute shifts in the wavelengths of the host star's light. 
This data showed how the star nodded back and forth in response to the planet's gravity allowing the team to calculate the masses of both objects.
Based on this combined data the team concludes that Kepler-10b must be a rocky world with an average density of 8.8 grams per cubic centimeter? about the same as a chunk of iron. 
Rocky World is "Planetary Missing Link" 
Being rocky however is no guarantee that a planet will be habitable. 
In the case of Kepler-10b one side of the planet always faces the star so that side would have a surface temperature of 2 500 degrees F (1 370 degrees C) Batalha estimates.
It's highly unlikely that such a world would retain an atmosphere since the searing hot gases would rapidly escape into space.
Still Kepler-10b is an enormously important find said Geoffrey Marcy a planet hunter at the University of California Berkeley. 
Marcy who is involved in the Kepler mission was not a core member of Batalha's team. 
"In astronomy we've been discovering giant gas planets for 15 years. But the ultimate goal is to discover habitable worlds like Earth " he said at the AAS meeting. ?
According to Marcy Kepler-10b is the "planetary missing link." 
"It's definitely not a gas giant like Jupiter. Nor is it habitable? it's too hot. 
This is a transitional planet somewhere between a gas giant and what we've been hoping to find." 
"One other possibly rocky planet COROT-7b might be even more Earthlike in size and mass Batalha agreed. 
But its star is much more active with flares and other disturbances making it difficult to nail down important parameters with the needed precision. 
"For Kepler-10 we were lucky " she said. 
"It's a very quiet star."
