Orbital Neighborhood Boundary Unclear?
Perhaps the most controversial part of the IAU ruling though is whether an object has cleared its orbital neighborhood. 
Kuchner who was a graduate student under Caltech's Brown thinks this part of the definition is the most subjective. 
In baseball he said "if you have a foul ball it's because the ball landed on one side of the line！！hat's pretty clear. 
But it's harder to say if something's a strike. ... 
That relies on someone calling it." 
In the case of defining a planet IAU made the call and "now we have to use this definition and try to play the game." 
Overall he added the ruling was crucial for limiting the number of things in the solar system that deserve to be called planets. 
"We really didn't have a choice " he said. "It was either going to be eight planets or a whole lotta planets. 
Nature sort of forced our hand." 
But other astronomers aren't in favor of placing those kinds of limits.
"There are more than 200 bones in the human body. Does that mean we should redefine bones to make life easier for medical students?" argued Timothy Spahr head of the IAU's Minor Planet Center based in Cambridge Massachusetts. 
Instead the IAU definition makes life more complicated for astronomers he said because the notion of whether an orbital neighborhood has been cleared remains hazy.
As an example Spahr points to the increased number of known Earth-crossing asteroids including roughly 8 000 that are considered near-Earth objects. 
While these space rocks don't exactly share our planet's orbit they do cross it in the sense that when they are closest to the sun they are inside Earth's orbital path.
"There's certainly no big donut where Earth is just a big mass of objects" that could be said to share our neighborhood he said.
This mass of objects will probably always exist as asteroids in the main belt collide break apart and send new material on orbits closer to Earth's.
"In 50 million years our orbital neighborhood will look pretty much the same." By some counts that means Earth will not ever clear its orbit of debris.
Spahr also notes that recent models of the solar system suggest the planets didn't form where they currently reside.
"There's been a lot of work done that says comets and other objects [including many dwarf planets] were formed between Neptune and Jupiter and as the giant planets migrated they threw stuff out " he said.
"You can see signatures of Jupiter's migration in the main asteroid belt.
"Probably as Neptune migrated outward it swept up objects like Pluto and locked them in orbital resonance" out in the Kuiper belt as they exist today.
And "certainly in the early solar system not very much had cleared its zone out " he added. "So are you a planet yesterday today and tomorrow? 
I can't tell you that" based on the IAU definition.
Planetary Science Constantly Evolving 
For his part Spahr favors a simpler definition than the current version.
"Orbiting a star and round is a good way to start " he said. Planetary scientist Alan Stern at the Southwest Research Institute calls it the Star Trek criteria he added: "If you can look out the viewfinder of the Enterprise and see it's round it's a planet."
From there Spahr said planets could be grouped into subclasses: terrestrial planets like Earth gas giants like Jupiter and icy outer planets like Pluto. 
"We could even have a category for rogue planets to account for the worlds that don't orbit stars."
While NASA's Kuchner thinks the current definition should stand for now he says he's "happy that we are constantly updating our definitions and revising our vision of universe！！that's what science is all about."
And of course no matter what you call it many astronomers will continue to see Pluto as one of the most fascinating objects in solar system the Minor Planet Center's Spahr said.
The IAU definition "doesn't change the fact that we're going to visit Pluto with [the New Horizons] spacecraft and scientists are still going to go hog wild over all the data we collect."
