FDA Warns Pfizer on Pediatric Trials of Geodon 
The Food and Drug Administration has warned Pfizer Inc. of "significant violations" involving pediatric trials of its antipsychotic drug Geodon.
The FDA posted a warning letter on its Web site Tuesday concerning clinical trials of an unnamed drug that the agency said was sponsored by Pfizer. 
A Pfizer spokeswoman confirmed the drug was Geodon, which is approved to treat schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in adults.
Pfizer is seeking FDA approval of the drug to treat bipolar disorder in pediatric patients ages 10 to 17. 
Last October, the FDA declined to approve the product for this use, requesting additional information. 
It isn't clear what effect the warning will have on the FDA's review of the trial results. 
The agency, however, typically holds off on approving products until all such concerns have been addressed.
In the warning letter, dated April 9, the FDA said "significant violations" were found during inspections of several clinical investigators involved in the studies. 
The FDA released the letter without the name of the product or names of specific study sites.
The FDA said as a result of inadequate monitoring by Pfizer, there was "widespread overdosing" of patients involved in the trials, conducted at multiple study locations, and the problem "was neither detected nor corrected in a timely manner."
The letter stemmed from inspections in 2005 and 2006 of clinical investigators who were conducting studies of pediatric patients being treated for bipolar disorder.
A Pfizer spokeswoman said the letter primarily related to one main study of Geodon that was conducted for bipolar disorder at 36 clinical sites. 
Pfizer uncovered problems at two sites and informed the FDA. 
The FDA conducted its own probe into the matter and found problems at three clinical sites.
Last June, an FDA panel of outside medical experts met to consider Geodon along with two other drugs for pediatric use. 
The panel said Geodon was effective at treating bipolar disorder but was split on whether the drug was safe.
Geodon's side effects can include sedation and severe sleepiness. 
Some patients in the trials experienced "severe" muscle tremors and other movement disorders, the FDA said.
Many panel members said they were concerned about the high number of patients who didn't complete clinical studies of Geodon, making its safety difficult to assess. 
The other drugs before the FDA panel¨DAstraZeneca PLC's Seroquel and Eli Lilly & Co.'s Zyprexa¨Dhave since been approved by the FDA for use in younger patients.
In a statement Tuesday, Pfizer said effectiveness data from the study sites that had "widespread violations" of FDA regulations were excluded from the final Geodon study results. All safety data were submitted to the agency.
The company said it plans to continue pursuing a pediatric indication for Geodon. 
An outside review of the Geodon data from an auditor won't be complete until August. 
Regarding the FDA's warning letter, Pfizer said it "recognizes the seriousness of the issues cited by the FDA and is committed to fully addressing FDA's concerns."
The FDA said problems seen in the clinical trial, such as overdosing, were "repeat violations" that were first uncovered after a 2005 FDA inspection looking at Pfizer's monitoring of clinical trials. At the time, the FDA said overdoses and other dosing errors were seen in seven pediatric patients.
The FDA noted that Pfizer attempted to retrain clinical study investigators at all study locations. 
However, in June, July and August of 2007 there were additional overdoses of patients in the study.
The letter said 40 patients had a dosing error in the study, including 20 patients who "exceeded" the maximum dose called for in the studies.
Pfizer has struggled with Geodon-related problems in the past. 
Last September the company agreed to pay $2.3 billion to settle federal and state civil and criminal charges for improper marketing of four drugs, including Geodon. 
The company also agreed to pay an additional $33 million to several states to settle allegations, including that the company promoted Geodon for use in pediatric patients and in higher-than-approved doses.
Pfizer said it has instituted new measures "including our oversight of clinical investigators." 
First approved in 2001, Geodon has been used to treat more than 2 million patients world-wide, Pfizer says.
