Apple's new iPhone set to heat up phone war 
The battle for dominance of the lucrative "smartphone" market will step up a gear on Monday as Apple is widely expected to launch a new version of the iPhone.
Apple has sold more than 21m iPhones in 80 countries since it was launched in 2007.
The new iPhone is so important to Apple that Steve Jobs, the chief executive, is expected to return from sick leave to attend the launch at Apple's Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) in San Francisco.
Mr Jobs, who has previously battled against pancreatic cancer, went on medical leave in January suffering from a hormonal imbalance. 
The company refused to confirm or deny whether or not Mr Jobs would be attending the conference, but said he is due back at work by the end of the month. 
Apple said Philip Schiller, its chief marketing officer, will give the key note speech.
Photos purporting to show the new iPhone were leaked on the internet over the weekend. 
The handset is expected to have a 3.2-megapixel camera, compared with the current 2-megapixel camera, a built-in compass and rubber-tread backing. 
Other photos show the device has a front-facing video camera to allow customers to engage in two-way video conversations.
Blogs also suggest Apple could also introduce a cheaper low-end version of the phone in an attempt to attract hard-pressed customers who are put off by the high cost.
Gene Munster, analyst at US investment bank Piper Jaffrey and the most highly-respected "Apple-watcher", said there could be wide-spread disappointment as he believes Apple will release a new operating system but no new phones. 
He said a new "family of iPhones" will probably not be released until July.
Apple has sold more than 21m iPhones in 80 countries since it was launched in 2007. 
It has about a 10pc share of the worldwide smartphone market, according to Gartner.
Apple's big announcement comes just days after Palm re-entered the smartphone market with its critically acclaimed Pre handset. 
The Pre, described as "the nearest rival to the iPhone", went on sale in America this weekend.
The Pre, which boasts a touch-screen and a slide-out keyboard, is expected to go on sale in the UK later this year. 
The success of the Pre could be a massive boon for U2 frontman Bono, whose private equity company Elevation Partners, owns 41pc of the company. 
Elevation increased its stake last December buying $100m (?62m) worth of shares at $3.24. 
The company's shares closed at $13 on Friday.
