Questions over health as Jobs skips Macworld
Apple chief executive Steve Jobs will not be giving the keynote address at the Macworld show in January for the first time in 12 years, raising more questions about his long-term health.
Instead of taking to the stage in San Francisco to unveil the company's latest products 每 an event that has become something of a fixture in the technology industry - Jobs will be replaced by Phil Schiller, one of Apple's senior vice presidents.
No reasons for Jobs's withdrawal were given, but in a statement Apple said that it was making a long-term decision to reduce its activity at trade shows and conferences 每 adding that after 2009's event was over, the company would no longer hold any kind of keynote at Macworld.
"It will be Apple's last keynote at the show," said the statement. "Apple has been steadily scaling back on trade shows in recent years." 
However, the decision to drop Jobs in favour of one of his subordinates is cause for concern among those who follow the company closely, rekindling speculation about the health of the 53-year-old.
Jobs was diagnosed with a rare form of pancreatic cancer in 2003, though he put off treatment until mid-2004. 
Although an operation to treat it was deemed successful, he has looked gaunt in recent public appearances and has started making significantly shorter appearances on stage.
"In business perception is everything. 
So it's tantamount that Steve get up on stage and keep up the image. 
Macworld is still a huge media event, mainly his keynote," he said.
"From that perspective, there would have to be something big to offset the many reasons why Steve should keynote Macworld. 
I come back to his health. 
I think that's the real news here, what today's last Macworld announcement seeks to obscure. 
Steve isn't well, and he hasn't been for some time."
According to Gene Munster, an analyst for Piper Jaffray, Apple was not settling Wall Street's concerns.
"I think that Apple could have done a lot to have made it so people wouldn't speculate about Steve Jobs' health," he told the Associated Press.
Immediately after the announcement, Apple's stock fell by nearly 2% in after-hours trading.
Jobs has given the keynote speech at the event since 1997, leading to it being nicknamed the "Stevenote". 
Over the years he has regularly delivered two--hour speeches in which he commands the stage almost throughout. 
But in recent months Jobs has been handing more public duties to executives including Schiller, as well as chief operating officer Tim Cook and Briton Jonathan Ive, the award-winning designer of the iPod.
His gaunt appearance at June's Apple Worldwide Developers' Conference led to speculation that the cancer had returned, and while the company has previously denied such reports, it is believed his dramatic weight loss was linked to treatment he had been receiving while in remission.
In October, Jobs tried to joke about the concerns over his health during a presentation to unveil new laptops when he put up a slide saying "110/70", saying that was his blood pressure - and that he would take no other questions on his health.
That seemed to put the rumours to rest, but the latest announcement will spark them again. 
Wall Street has been nervous about the company's ability to come through the economic downturn with the same growth, judging it to be highly reliant on the consumer side of the economy, which has been very weak in the US. 
Apple however has enormous cash reserves and could almost certainly ride out any financial bad weather.
What is less clear is how well it could weather a prolonged illness or absence of the man who is acknowledged to have breathed new life into it when he rejoined in 1996, and is now seen as its figurehead and driving force.
The announcement meanwhile that Apple will not exhibit at future Macworld Expo shows almost certainly spells the death knell for the show - which will struggle to justify its existence without either Jobs or its principal supplier to draw crowds.
It may end up rolled into the Consumer Electronics Show, which runs at the same time - although in past years Jobs's presentations have damped CES's announcements so thoroughly that that show, held in Las Vegas, has shrunk in both size and impact.
Wil Shipley, an independent software developer, criticised the show as expensive: "Small booth: $15,000 You wanted internet? $1,000. You wanted curtains? $4,500. Decent carpet? $2,000. Power? Trash cans?.. 
You wanted extra outlets? Have to hire one of our union electricians. 
How many hours you want him for?"
Apple's fortunes have been directly linked to Jobs, who has spearheaded its renaissance since rejoining in 1996 after a decade in exile from the company he co-founded. 
In the process Apple has almost attained the status of a personal cult, identified with Jobs far more than Google or even Microsoft ever have been with their leaders.
Apple lost direction in the years after Jobs was ousted, its share price slumping to an all-time low before his return. 
Under Jobs, the company has gone from strength to strength, establishing itself as a byword for innovation and elegant design.
The launch of the iMac and iBook were followed by the iPod, which was not the first 每 or even to some minds the best 每 digital music player but led a revolution in the consumption of music thanks to its sleek and user-friendly design. 
In 2007, Apple enhanced its reputation for technological innovation with the launch of the iPhone, a touchscreen smartphone that marked a step change in the mobile world.
