Genetic or Not, Gay Won¡¯t Go Away
That has long been one of the rallying cries of a movement, and sometimes the gist of its argument. 
Across decades of widespread ostracism, followed by years of patchwork acceptance and, most recently, moments of heady triumph, gay people invoked that phrase to explain why homophobia was unwarranted and discrimination senseless.
Lady Gaga even spun an anthem from it.
But is it the right mantra to cling to? 
The best tack to take?
Not for the actress Cynthia Nixon, 45, whose comments in The New York Times Magazine last Sunday raised those very questions.
For 15 years, until 2003, she was in a relationship with a man. They had two children together. 
She then formed a new family with a woman, to whom she¡¯s engaged. 
And she told The Times¡¯s Alex Witchel that homosexuality for her ¡°is a choice.¡±
¡°For many people it¡¯s not,¡± she conceded, but added that they ¡°don¡¯t get to define my gayness for me.¡± 
They do get to fume, though. Last week some did. 
They complained that she represented a minority of those in same-sex relationships and that she had furthermore handed a cudgel to our opponents, who might now cite her professed malleability as they make their case that incentives to change, not equal rights, are what we need.
But while her critics have good reason to worry about how her words will be construed and used, they have no right to demand the kind of silence and conformity from Nixon that gay people have justly rebelled against. 
She¡¯s entitled to her own truth and manner of expressing it.
Besides which, there are problems with some gay advocates¡¯ insistence that homosexuality be discussed and regarded as something ingrained at the first breath.
By hinging a whole movement on a conclusion that hasn¡¯t been ¡ª and perhaps won¡¯t be ¡ª scientifically pinpointed and proved beyond all doubt, they hitch it to a moving target. 
The exact dynamics through which someone winds up gay are ¡°still an open question,¡± said Clinton Anderson, the director of the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Concerns Office of the American Psychological Association. 
¡°There is substantial evidence of various connections between genes, brain, hormones and sexual identity,¡± he said. 
¡°But those do not amount to a simple picture that A leads to B.¡±
One landmark study looked at gay men¡¯s brothers and found that 52 percent of identical twin brothers were also gay, in contrast with only 22 percent of nonidentical twin brothers and 11 percent of adoptive, genetically unrelated brothers. 
Heredity more than environment seemed to be calling the shots.
Other research has posited or identified common anatomical and chromosomal traits among gay men or lesbians, and there¡¯s discussion of a gay gene or, rather, set of genes in the mix. 
The push to isolate it is entwined with the belief that establishing that sexual orientation is like skin color ¡ª an immutable matter of biology ¡ª will make homophobia as inexcusable as racism and winnow the ranks of haters.
But bigotry isn¡¯t rational. 
Finding a determinative biological quirk, deviation or marker could prompt religious extremists who now want gays in reparative psychotherapy to focus on medical interventions instead. And a person¡¯s absence of agency over his or her concentration of melanin has hardly ended all discrimination against blacks.
What¡¯s more, the born-this-way approach carries an unintended implication that the behavior of gays and lesbians needs biological grounding to evade condemnation. 
Why should it?
Our laws safeguard religious freedom, and that¡¯s not because there¡¯s a Presbyterian, Buddhist or Mormon gene. 
There¡¯s only a tradition and theology that you elect or decline to follow. 
But this country has deemed worshiping in a way that feels consonant with who you are to be essential to a person¡¯s humanity. 
So it¡¯s protected.
Our laws also safeguard the right to bear arms: not exactly a biological imperative.
Among adults, the right to love whom you¡¯re moved to love ¡ª and to express it through sex and maybe, yes, marriage ¡ª is surely as vital to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness as a Glock. 
And it¡¯s a lot less likely to cause injury, if that¡¯s a deciding factor: how a person¡¯s actions affect the community around him or her.
I USE the words ¡°moved to love¡± in an effort to define the significant, important territory between ¡°born this way¡± and choice. 
That solid ground covers ¡°built this way,¡± ¡°oriented this way,¡± and ¡°evolved this way¡±; it incorporates the possibility of a potent biological predisposition mingling with other factors beyond anyone¡¯s ready control; and it probably applies to Nixon herself. 
In a Daily Beast interview after the Times article appeared, she clarified that she has experienced an unforced, undeniable attraction to individuals of both sexes. 
In other words, she¡¯s bisexual, not whimsical. 
She just happens not to like that term, she said.
