Brevard S. Childs, an iconic figure in biblical scholarship, dies at 83 
Brevard S. Childs, one of the most influential Old Testament scholars of the 20 th century, died Saturday, June 23 in New Haven, CT. He was 83 and died after a long illness. 
"I can think of no person who made a greater contribution to the work of unifying the Bible, theology and church life together in a very serious way, not in a flimsy or a pious way," said Christopher Seitz, a Biblical scholar at the University of Toronto who was Childs's student, colleague and friend. 
"I think of him as a sort of Isaiah figure who was given a very hard job to preach and teach but never complained. 
He just went about his business in a hopeful way." 
As an Old Testament professor at Yale Divinity School from 1958 to 1999, Childs shaped several generations of students and helped define new approaches to post-war biblical scholarship. 
With at least eight of his books in print in three languages and a manuscript for a new book completed shortly before his death, Childs was a prolific author who did not shrink from fully engaging the academic debates of his day. 
"His major contribution to the field was his insistence on the importance of the canonical shape and location of all the biblical books," said Yale Divinity School Dean Harold Attridge. 
"Taking this perspective enabled him to recover the ways in which scripture has been read as a larger whole, with an integral witness to the God of Israel and of Jesus Christ."
Born in 1923 in Columbia, South Carolina, Bard, as friends and family knew him, moved as a child to Queens, New York. 
During World War II, he served in the U.S. military, attaining the rank of sergeant. 
Childs then attended the University of Michigan, graduating with a B.A. and an M.A. 
Later, in 1950, he earned a B.D. at Princeton Theological Seminary. 
There, in Basel, Childs met his wife, Ann, while in a seminar conducted by Swiss theologian Karl Barth. 
Throughout his career, Barth remained one of Childs's defining influences and one of his few equals. 
