All About Bong Joon-ho's Mother 
Mother, the new film by Bong Joon-ho (Memories of Murder and The Host) isn¡¯t your typical murder mystery. 
Upon viewing the trailer, one might think that it¡¯s simply a tale of a mother (played by Kim Hye-ja) attempting to clear the name of her son (Won Bin), who has been framed for murder. 
In attempting to discover the identity of the real murderer, though, the mother finds herself a part of the previously unknown dark side of her small Korean town.
As grisly as the subject matter seems, the movie does not rely on excessive displays of violence to shock the audience. 
It¡¯s a testament to the director¡¯s skill that the audience cares about more than just unraveling the mystery of who committed the murder; they care about the mother herself and how the events of the town impact her state of mind. 
It is Bong Joon-ho¡¯s masterful character development, coupled with the understated and chilling acting of Kim Hye-ja, that makes Mother so much better than a straightforward whodunit. 
Bong Joon-ho took part in a Q&A at The Korea Society in New York City, where he talked about Mother, his previous films and the state of Korean cinema in 2010. 
The conversation was moderated by Michael Atkinson, professor of film at Long Island University, and opened up to questions from the audience. 
What follows is an excerpt from both conversations.
Q:There has been a ¡°Korean New Wave¡± starting in the late ¡®90s and going into the new millennium, with many new directors receiving international recognition. Do you perceive it that way and where did it come from? 
Bong Joon-ho (BJ): In the early ¡®90s and 2000s, there was a phenomenon called ¡°Korean New Wave,¡± as you mention, but it wasn¡¯t a conscious collective effort. It just happened that certain filmmakers were making good output during that time, and I wasn¡¯t focused on that¡ªnone of us were. 
We were just trying to make good films. It just happened that we were making films in that time period. 
In 1992, the militaristic regime ended [in Korea] and democracy was setting in, there was more freedom from censorship and freedom of filmmaking that let new directors try new things. 
There was a lot of fresh blood coming into the system of the filmmaking industry, and directors like Hong Sang-soo, Kim Ki-duk and Im Sang-soo are among that crowd. Even the older generation of fillmmakers wanted to work with these younger filmmakers as well, so that was another factor. 
Q: Do you think there is a distinctive flavor to the films in the last 10 years compared to older Korean films or films in general? 
BJ: Although I¡¯m not sure of distinctive differences, newer filmmakers like Kim Ji-woon and Park Chan-wook are what I would call ¡®film maniacs.¡¯ I include myself in this¡ªwe were really into films, and we really love watching films. We are the generation that frequented video stores, renting and watching movies. 
Someone like Im Kwon-taek, who is much older than us, has a rich tradition of filmmaking on set, being on set and having made films for many years before us. 
I think that¡¯s the difference: We are not from the film-on-set generation, whereas the older generation was already making films for a long time. 
I think Hong Sang-soo had studied in the U.S., and a lot of newer generation filmmakers have studied abroad, outside of Korea. 
Q: Starting with your first film as a director, Barking Dogs Never Bite, you used complex characters with flaws. Why do you empathize with characters like that? 
BJ: I¡¯m not a person who can be set about one person¡¯s attributes, and I¡¯m not inclined towards one person or another, but I think I always have a duality of accepting a person¡ªhating the person, but also having sympathy for him or her as well. 
I¡¯m not prone to judge or make a judgment about one side of the person. 
Even the detectives in Memories of Murder, they are what you would call ¡°bad cops"¡ªthey hit their witnesses and suspects, and they are violent. Those are obviously qualities that we shouldn¡¯t accept readily, but you can¡¯t really hate them for it either. 
I think there is always a duality of a victim within the instigator. 
Q: Your follow-up to Barking Dogs, Memories of Murder, was based on a real case in the 1980s. What drew you to make a film about it?  
BJ: I combined a lot of actual things that happened, as well as my imagination, and for this film there was a stage play that was created about the incident.
