Wear a Denim Bridal Gown? Not Yet, but ...
SHOPPING for a gown, one of the first to-do¡¯s on any bride¡¯s checklist, is about as unfettered and do-as-you-please as it has ever been.
Unwritten rules that have long hemmed in the traditional bride (like wearing white, unless it¡¯s a second wedding) have been jettisoned in favor of statement-making fashion-forward choices that better express a bride¡¯s true personality and tastes, industry experts say.
Want to wear pants or a slit up to there (two of the freshest innovations on the recent bridal runways) or a boho halo in lieu of a veil?
Now a bride can.
Some of the biggest trends in bridal fashion for the coming year include lace sleeves (call it the Kate effect) and high-low hemlines (also strong in designer ready-to-wear spring collections).
SLEEVES AND ILLUSION NECKLINES
The Kim Kardashian debacle aside, the biggest wedding moment of 2011 belonged to Kate Middleton, in her gown designed by Sarah Burton for Alexander McQueen.
¡°The royal wedding sort of put a stamp of approval on sleeves for brides who have thought previously they can look dated,¡± the designer Lela Rose wrote in an e-mail.
Not only the princess, but several more of last year¡¯s highest-profile brides ¡ª including Lauren Bush (in a gown by her father-in-law, Ralph Lauren), Nancy Shevell (in an off-white, to-the-knee creation by new daughter-in-law Stella McCartney) and even the fictional Bella Swan (in Carolina Herrera) ¡ª all wore sleeves.
So it¡¯s no surprise that many designers have embraced the trend in their latest collections.
¡°It¡¯s not the big poof sleeve of the ¡¯80s,¡± said Nicole Sewell, divisional merchandise manager of Bhldn, a wedding shop that offers many bridal gowns with sleeves.¡°It¡¯s sheer, it¡¯s slim, it¡¯s lace, and it¡¯s sexy.¡± 
Still, some designers caution that most brides will still choose a strapless style.
¡°It¡¯s the most universally flattering,¡± said Judd Waddell, a wedding dress designer.
READY-TO-WEAR INFLUENCES
As noted by Darcy Miller, editorial director of Martha Stewart Weddings magazine, ready-to-wear designers continue to enter the bridal market.
Last year, for example, Dennis Basso showed his first collection of wedding gowns for Kleinfeld, and Matthew Williamson, following a collaboration with Net-a-Porter in 2010, introduced his independent bridal line, pushing innovation and creativity and adding an array of styles and silhouettes previously unavailable.
Bebe will begin selling a bridal collection, Rami Kashou for Bebe, in March.
Among the fashion-inspired details that buyers saw on recent runways were peplums (Lela Rose), leg slits (Angel Sanchez), high-low hems (Monique Lhuillier), one-shoulder silhouettes (Oleg Cassini) and men¡¯s-wear references.
Regarding the latter, Oscar de la Renta showed pants, and Theia had a tuxedo-inspired jumpsuit, while Bhldn plans to offer cigarette pants, a vest and lace shorts in its next spring collection.
¡°I was thinking of the sophisticated girl, who is just as cool and just as chic, and wouldn¡¯t be caught dead in a dress,¡± Don O¡¯Neill, Theia¡¯s creative director, said of his tuxedo look.
