Norway's northernmost frontier 
As the awful events of August proved, the danger of bear attacks has not gone away: as long as there are bears, they will never be completely avoidable.
Yet Svalbard＊s guides are never blas谷 about the risks 每 like Martin, they are all armed.
Despite its breathtaking beauty, the Svalbard winter is hostile.
Aside from the bears 每 which outnumber humans by three to two 每 residents and visitors must contend with enormous distances, poor means of communication, strong winds, frozen seas, ice storms and, of course, the extreme cold.
The temperature in the largest settlement, Longyearbyen (the world＊s northernmost town), falls as low as -46 C, and only remains steadily above freezing between June and September.
Nonetheless, a couple of thousand people choose to call this archipelago home.
You do not need a visa or even a passport to live here and, as a result, the human population is diverse, comprising 26 different nationalities 每 from Russians to Indians, Swedes to Chinese.
There was an Iranian here until last year, too 每 a refugee from political persecution in his own country.
After Norwegians, the biggest group is Thai.
＆Thirty years ago, a Norwegian from Svalbard fell in love with a Thai woman,＊ explains Lisa, a guide in Longyearbyen.＆I guess word got around.＊ 
Walking through Longyearbyen 每 a cluster of pretty, multicoloured wooden houses buried deep in the drifts 每 it soon becomes apparent that the word did indeed spread.
＆I was looking for work abroad and it was easier to apply here than anywhere else,＊ says Lek, a Thai cleaner who moved from Bangkok to Longyearbyen 10 years ago with her daughter.＆But I really like it.Last year I married a Norwegian, too.＊ 
Patricia, a Peruvian who runs a sports boutique, doesn＊t seem quite so sold on the cold.
＆I didn＊t know there would be no flowers,＊ she says.＆And no trees.
I＊ve been here six years, but it is a nice place to live.
Especially in March 每 that＊s my favourite time of year.＊ 
Jayakumar, a Malaysian technician, has no such mixed feelings.
＆It＊s so cool,＊ he says, with a massive grin.＆The best part is snowmobiling.
And in summer, with the long hours of daylight, it＊s a party all the time.＊ 
It isn＊t far from Longyearbyen to the Arctic wilderness: in fact, it＊s just around the corner.
Just 20 minutes from the town by snowmobile, up in the mountains, the sky has clouded over.
There is perhaps no landscape on Earth so profoundly changed by the light as the frozen poles.
Under flat grey clouds, the landscape looks starkly monochrome, without any hint of colour: nothing but pure white snow and sharp black rocks.
Then, when the light glows softly around the clouds, it comes to life.
The flat, endless white is transformed into a fairytale scene of sugared-almond pinks, lilacs and turquoises.
When the sun peeks over the horizon, the colours intensify.
The edges of the clouds become fiery gold smears. The snow glows peach.
At one point, there is a patch of sky visible between slate-grey clouds that is the exact colour of cr豕me de menthe.
Then, as the sun sets, the whole landscape is plunged into a deep, moody cobalt blue 每 the beginning of a long winter night.
Beyond the mountains is another town, so different from Longyearbyen it feels like another world.
Back in the early years of the Cold War, Svalbard was the setting for a face-off between the Soviets and the Norwegians, both of whom built settlements here.
Though Norway was awarded sovereignty over the archipelago in 1920, Svalbard＊s status as a demilitarised and free economic zone allowed the Soviets to maintain a substantial mining operation throughout WWII and the Cold War.
From the 1950s through to the 1980s, the Russian population here was about twice the size of its Norwegian counterpart.
The most striking relic of those times is Barentsburg, a Russian mining base that can only be reached from Longyearbyen after several hours on a snowmobile.
These days, half of Barentsburg is a ghost town. Deep in the winter snow, it＊s hard to tell which half.
Abandoned buildings are painted with peeling murals of well-fed cows, a legacy of Soviet efforts to start farms in this unlikely location.
There are monuments dedicated to over-achieving workers.
A bust of Lenin glares down over the settlement, his face half-covered in snow.
A few hundred people, mostly Ukrainians, still live here, but it feels like the frontier of a disappeared world, frozen in time.
The Soviet town runs along the edge of a wide fjord and we set off across it in a convoy.
We speed up through a mountain pass, bouncing over heaps of powdery snow.
The glow is fading from the sky.
As the convoy heads west into the dying light, an ice storm descends.
In the headlamps, the shower of ice sparkles like millions of falling diamonds. It is a captivating sight.
The red taillights of the snowmobiles in front are all that can be seen. However, the ice is falling fast, and even these lights soon disappear behind a crystalline veil.
Now all the drivers can do is follow the tracks, hoping that in the middle of this endless, whirling torrent they are heading in the right direction.
Soon enough, three yellow lights glimmer through the veil. This is Isfjord Radio, a former radio station that was once the only way people on Svalbard could communicate with mainland Norway.
Enormous satellite dishes relayed signals and Norwegian television was recorded and replayed 24 hours later for the local population 每 who were, therefore, consigned to live perpetually in the past.
Technology has moved on since then and the radio station is no longer in use.
Instead, it has become a hotel 每 complete with a library, a long-wave radio receiver in every room and a menu of Svalbard delicacies, such as Arctic cod, reindeer and whale.
Just four people live on this side of Spitsbergen, and they all work at the hotel.
Fredrik and Lena are the cheerful young couple in charge. They were offered a three-year contract to live in this otherworldly place on the shore of a frozen sea, with nothing for miles around.
Why did they take it?
＆First of all, because this place is amazing,＊ says Fredrik.
＆There＊s a lot of history. Isfjord has a small place in the heart of everyone in Svalbard.＊ 
It is the uniqueness of Isfjord that made it so irresistible, Lena adds.
＆There was nothing to think about.Of course we would take the job.＊
Their great passions are hunting and fishing.
＆A reindeer provides a lot of food for us and for our dogs,＊ Fredrik explains.＆But the rules are very strict on hunting here.It＊s not like the Wild West.＊ 
In the warm, cosy lounge, sipping red wine and reading a book while the Arctic storm swirls outside, it＊s not hard to see why Fredrik and Lena look so contented.
＆It＊s a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity,＊ Fredrik remarks.
A visit to Svalbard is just that: an unforgettable encounter with a strange, beautiful and alien world.
