From the wheelchair based on an F1 car to the 'Terminator' exo-skeleton suit: How technology is transforming the Paralympics 
Technology includes the 'Brain Sled' you control with you mind and the 'Ghost' glove that trains you to swim like Phelps 
But controversy over blade runners begs the question: Is technology levelling the playing field - or conferring an unfair advantage? 
High tech wheels: BMW used their F1 experience to design the perfect wheelchairs for Britain's basketball teams 
As Britain's paralympic basketball team takes to the court, they have a secret weapon - a hi-tech foam seat designed by BMW engineers using cutting-edge technologies from motor sport.
It is just part of a range of cutting-edge technologies on show at the Paralympics this year - from the Ghost glove improves technique by offering vibrating feedback on your form and posture, to human exo-skeletons which provide 'Iron Man'-style superhuman strength.
At the next Paralympics, we could see blind runners taking a course unaided thanks to headsets which can watch for hurdles as well as providing left and right instructions, and perhaps a new generation of 'blade runners', who can use advanced technology to push themselves even further.
The technology is well-embedded in the 2012 Games, with the carbon 'blade runners' perhaps the most visible example of the aiding technology.
The current carbon fibre running prostheses, such as those used by Oscar Pistorius, can now deliver an elastic energy return of 92 per cent, compared to 95 per cent for natural human tendons.
The connection between the body and the artificial limb has also been improved - sockets use silicone liners to prevent blistering and discomfort while suction valves are used to provide a seamless connection between the skin and prosthetic.
The advances made for these Paralympics are unlikely to remain confined to the Olympic Park. 
The International Paralympic Committee (IPC) stipulates in its guidelines that manufacturers of all the equipment used during London 2012 must consider the cost and large-scale availability of their products, ensuring that their developments are not restricted to the elite.
Lighter, more agile carbon-fibre wheelchairs are already commercially available, but can cost as much as ¡ê2,000. 
As this technology develops, thanks, in part, to the work sports engineers are doing with elite athletes, their availability is likely to dramatically increase.
Another technology helping Paralympians at the moment is the throwing frame - a key piece of equipment for many Paralympic discus, shot put and club throwers.
These frames were once crudely adapted chairs, but for the 2012 Paralympics many athletes have turned to engineers to refine their design.
Derek Derenalagi of Great Britain takes a shot at glory, supporting by state-of-the-art frames that allow him to put his full weight behind the discus .
Take soldier Derek Derenalagi, whose Land Rover was blown up in Afghanistan in 2007, competes on two artificial legs, so he needs support when he throws the discus.
For the 2012 Games, engineering charity Remap helped devise a new aluminium frame, which has special plate sockets for the prosthetics.
This allows Derek, 37, to generate more power without losing any balance.
Remap volunteer Roger Thorn told The Mirror: 'We were simply amazed at the energy Derek produces and knew we would have to design a very strong frame'
The wheel, re-invented: Great Britain's David Weir finishes 3rd during Round 1, Heat 1 of the Men's 1500m 
Then on to the finish line: David Weir then celebrates as he wins gold in the Men's 5000m
Craig Maclean (left) and Anthony Kappes of Britain's track cycling team celebrate winning the Men's Individual B-Sprint Gold Medal Final at the London 2012 Paralympic games in the Velodrome
The track teams also have high-end hardware around them when they race.
David Weir - who won his first Gold on Sunday evening, is fitted with a custom-built chair at a cost of ¡ê 5,000.
He told the Telegraph: 'Actually our chairs are like Formula One cars; they're the absolute cutting edge of technology, and everything has to be just perfect.
'If it wasn't for wheelchair racing I don't know what I would have done. I'd probably have been a bum.
'There are more kids on the streets in wheelchairs and the public are used to seeing them. 
Also I think people have become fascinated by the Paralympics from what they've seen on TV. They realise they can be as exciting as able-bodied sport.'
Archery by foot: Matt Stutzman on his way to win the silver medal in Archery at the Paralympic Games, London
The feet of Matt Stutzman of the United States holds his bow in technology specially created to for the sport
Meanwhile Jeff Fabry of the U.S. uses his mouth to fire an arrow on the way to winning gold in the Men's Individual Compound-W1 classification Archery final 
Last week, The Mail on Sunday revealed UK Sport had spent Â£700,000 on research and innovation.
To assess aerodynamic efficiency, wheelchairs have been blasted with air in wind tunnels built by defence firm BAE Systems and used to develop the Eurofighter Typhoon jet.
Manoeuvrability has been measured using cutting-edge tracking technology developed by Formula 1 team McLaren, while the seats have been created by car firm BMW.
It is a far cry from the Stoke Mandeville Games, the pre-runner to the Paralympics in 1948.
At that time, wheelchairs weighed up to 23kg. 
Nowadays, thanks to carbon-fibre chairs and precise engineering, the weight is down to just 2kg.
Alison Macpherson, research co-ordinator at UK Sport, told The Mirror: 'The advances are amazing.
'We have put a lot of work into improving the athletes medal chances. But in the end it' s all about their talent and hard work.'
Britain's Paralympians model their range of specially-adapted supports as they prepare to bring back the gold 
Over at UK company Tharsus, Stephen Miller, a Team GB club and discus thrower, has been working to create a bespoke throwing frame which straps the athlete in by his thighs, allowing them to use all their force to throw with a free range of movement.
Meanwhile Ossur, one of the world's leading prosthetics manufacturers, has developed a specially-designed leg prosthetic for use in track cycling.
Five times Paralympic gold medalist Jody Cundy has been working with engineers since Beijing to modify the design of his Ossur artificial limb so it is now more lightweight and aerodynamic, and no longer requires a cycling shoe as the leg clips into the pedal.
Future tech: The Ekso exo-skeleton which lets paraplegics walk again 
The first Ekso was sold this year - and one day, such "Iron Man" -style suits could allow athletes to perform superhuman feats such as lifting enormous weights.
At present, the exoskeleton can only walk slowly, and the expensive, computer-controlled hydraulic machines is used to deliver the health benefits of walking to paralysed patients.
Defence companies such as Lockheed Martin and Raytheon have already expressed interest in the technology for use on the battlefield.
From peaceful games to warfare...
Exo-skeletons could help Paralympians reach new heights - and defence companies have also expressed interest in the technology for use on the battlefield 
Jon-Allan Butterworth, also of Team GB, uses a prosthetic arm that has been specially designed to allow him to cycle in the most aerodynamic position possible.
BMW used their F1 experience to design the perfect wheelchairs for Britain's basketball teams.
Britain? s athletes were scanned using 3D optical scanners as they sat on a beanbag-esque " seat " which captured their position as they sat in it, to an accuracy of 1mm.
Using the same computer-aided design processes used to build F1 cars, and hi-tech '3D printing' machines, the engineers created bespoke seats from the 3D scans which fit each athlete precisely.
Louise Sugden, Ade Oregbem and Claire Williams in their moulded-wheelchairs 
For the first time, the new moulded foam seat will enable athletes to move as one with their chair - shaving 0.14 of a second off their time to complete a 20m straight line course.
Ade Orogbemi, who will use the modified wheelchair at the Paralympic World Cup, said, "The new seat has improved my game enormously. The stability gives me the ability to turn quickly both going right and left which I was unable to do before.
Not just your standard wheelchair: The IOC insists that all technology filters through to the wider population 
The extra speed it gives me around the court makes it easier to defend against the best attacking sides in the world to give us that unique advantage. 
I believe it is allowing me to play my best ever basketball."
The seats were created in hi-tech rapid prototyping machines which 'print' solid objects layer by layer over the course of 24 hours.
BMW use the machines extensively in car design, creating 50,000 prototypes per year for use in tests.
'Rapid prototyping' is an industrial process similar to printing in 3D - engineers take a 3D computer model, then use a van-sized sintering machine to create a plastic version in the real world. The seats are crafted from a super-flexible material called Duraform EX.
The "close fit" of the chair allowed engineers to shave weight off elsewhere, cutting holes in the material of the wheelchair to shave off crucial grams.
It' s an entirely new idea that has never been used before - described as a  step forward? for the sport by the International Wheelchair Basketball Federation.
Blade runners: Levelling the playing field - or conferring an unfair advantage?
The South African runner Oscar Pistorius has been accused of using spring-loaded legs which make him ? superhuman? - letting him use 20% less energy at high speeds.
And during his defeat this week, he accused Alan Oliveira of winning due to his extra-extended springs.
Engineers believe that legs where the ? springiness? is adjusted during the run could perform even better.
Aftermath: Oscar Pistorius (left) congratulates Alan Oliveira following the race - but then arguments broke out about how much of an advantage Oliveira's springs offered him
Shock: Oliveira (left) was a surprise winner in the T44 200m final at Olympic Park 
"Pistorius tends to start off slow,"says Dr Jim Usherwood of the Wellcome Trust. "But if you could adjust the spring with a dynamic spring or some gentle powering in the upper leg, he would be even faster."
Under current Paralympic rules, though, such legs would not be legal in competition.
Future tech: The 'Brain Sled' you control with you mind 
The "Brain Sled" was designed by engineering students at Imperial college, and uses electrical signals in the brain to "steer" a sled in a bobsleigh-style event.
It's technically feasible now, using a commercially available "mind-reading" headset called the Emotiv EPOC ($299), which is sometimes used by video gamers.
The 'Brain Sled' uses electrical signals in the brain to 'steer' a sled in a bobsleigh-style event 
"The prototype we made has working parts," says Dr Dominic Southgate of Imperial College, London. "With training, it could steer left and right, and open up sports to completely paralysed athletes."
Many of the technologies already exist. 
Our "brain sled" prototype was based on a commercially available mind-reading headset which reads brain waves - and once you train up the system, if you think ¡ªLeft¡ª , it will turn left.
'But it wouldn¡¯t be legal in the Paralympics as they stand. 
Our project opened up possibilities for new sports - as well as raising a question about what "sport" actually is.
The new seat design was so radical it had to be approved by the Paralympic committee to see that it met the strict regulations for the sport.
Much of the equipment used by the UK teams has been tested at British Aerospace's wind tunnel in Wharton. 
Wheelchair athletes move at speeds of up to 20mph, and simply pulling a T-shirt down over an athlete' s knees can shave tenths of a second off performance.
