STRANGE BUT TRUE
Sure, the Olympic Marathon produces great champions but also bizarrely weird moments. 
Here are nine that still astound us.
Each edition of the Olympic games presents astonishing, if often expected, athletic feats. 
Think the '92 dream team thumping all-comers.
Or Michael Johnson blitzing his way to world records in '96 in golden spikes. 
But usually the most memorable moments are the ones that happen unpredictably, leaving spectators laughing, crying, or totally unprepared to react at all.
The Olympic Marathon often features the great, the awful, and the you've-got-to-be-kidding. 
After all, it is the longest, most arduous, and most historic of the Games' events！the perfect stage for wondrous victories. 
It is also the most public event ！ run on city streets, not inside a pricey, high-security stadium?so strange stuff can happen, and often does. 
I've been studying the Olympics, attending the Games, and interviewing its Marathon champions for nearly a half-century. 
This summer I'll be in London covering the next installment, waiting to witness the latest in glory?and ignominy. 
To get ready, I've compiled my list of the oddest moments in Olympic Marathon history. 
Enjoy these unforgettable memories.
1908, London: Supporting 
Cast Due to its grueling nature, the Olympic Marathon often produces scenes dramatic enough to warrant exploration in literature and song. This was never truer than in 1908！all thanks to a diminutive Italian runner who didn't even win the race.
Dorando Pietri was first into the Olympic Stadium, but so sapped by the distance (this was the first-ever marathon of 26 miles, 385 yards; previously races had been roughly 25 miles) and warm weather that he wobbled the wrong way on the track, then collapsed. 
Rising, he staggered a few steps, then collapsed again and again while spectators looked on with a mix of horror and fascination. 
Trackside officials came to Pietri's aid, and eventually half-carried his limp body across the finish line. 
American Johnny Hayes finished a short time thereafter, but the Italian flag had already been raised up the victory pole. After an official American complaint, Pietri was rightfully disqualified.
He was not dishonored, however. Indeed, many viewed him as a heroic figure. 
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (of Sherlock Holmes fame) was close at hand for the chaotic finish, later writing, "No Roman of prime has ever borne himself better. The great breed is not yet extinct." Months later promoters in New York City began staging wildly popular Pietri vs. Hayes "rematches." 
And composer Irving Berlin wrote a song, presumably the worst of his career, called "Dorando." It included this line: "He run-a, run-a, run-a like anything."
Her Royal Kindness! 
Illegal aid cost Pietri gold, but his sportsmanship earned him a trophy from Queen Alexandra.
1952, Helsinki: Triple Threat
As the 1952 helsinki olympics drew to a close, Czech-oslovakia's Emil Zatopek, 29, had already won the 5000 meters and 10,000 meters, setting new Olympic records in both. 
He could have rested on his substantial laurels. 
Instead, he chose to enter an event he had never run before the marathon. 
There he faced England's tough-as-nails Jim Peters, who had recently lowered the world record from 2:25:39 to 2:20:43.
Hoping to shake his unexpected new foe, Peters started at a crazy fast pace, especially given the warm weather. 
Zatopek followed on his heels. 
Just before halfway, Zatopek turned to Peters and asked, in perfect, formal English: "Excuse me, but the pace?is it fast enough?" Not to be outdone, Peters answered, "No, too slow," so Zatopek accelerated. 
Peters couldn't keep up and eventually dropped out near the 20-mile mark.
By that time Zatopek was alone and well ahead of the field. 
Before a capacity crowd in the Olympic Stadium, the new marathoner broke the tape in 2:23:03?his third Olympic record in three races at the Helsinki Games. 
No one before or since has matched his triple-gold performance in the 5000 meters, 10,000 meters, and marathon.
What An Entrance! The massive Finnish Crowd gave Zatopek "a frenzied roar of adulation," The New York Times said.
1960, Rome: Shoeless Wonder 
The Italian organizers of the Rome Olympic Marathon expected their event to make history. 
It was the first Marathon that neither started nor finished in the Olympic Stadium, instead offering a tour of the ancient city's famous historical sites. 
As an added flourish, they started the race in early evening, guaranteeing that the runners would conclude by the flickering glow of a thousand torches. 
But the organizers never imagined the winner would run barefoot, that he would be from Africa, and that his triumph would mark a turning point in the evolution of worldwide distance running. 
No one had ever heard of 28-year-old Abebe Bikila before the race, and at the start the Ethiopian drew snickers: He wasn't wearing shoes. 
Given that some of the final miles would be run over the cobblestoned Appian Way, his approach seemed suicidal. 
Bikila paid no heed. He ran an easy 5-K, was with the leaders at 10-K, and went to the front with Moroccan Rhadi Ben Abdesselam at 20-K.
 The two ran the rest of the way side by side until Bikila, with a seemingly effortless glide, surged ahead in the last mile. 
He made his move as he passed the obelisk of Axum, an Ethiopian relic plundered by Italy and moved to Rome. (It was returned to Ethiopia in 2008.) 
Bikila's time, 2:15:17, was not just an Olympic record, but a new world record. 
Foot Soldier Bikila, who followed his barefoot win with more gold in 1964, was a guard to Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie.
1968, Mexico City: Last, Not Least 
Most runners enter the Olympic Marathon with dreams of glory. Of course, only three can win medals. 
And some poor soul must finish last. 
In 1968, that was Tanzanian John Stephen Akhwari. 
An hour after Ethiopia's Mamo Wolde had claimed the gold medal in 2:20:26, and with only a few thousand athletes, fans, and officials remaining in a darkening Olympic Stadium, a runner came through the tunnel. 
It was Akhwari. He had fallen heavily at some point, and badly injured his right knee. Medics urged him to quit, but he would not. 
As Akhwari approached the track, he broke into a halting, painful jog. 
He received a smattering of applause, and then more, and then, as he continued gamely around the track, a wild crescendo. 
This was not the Olympic champion, the onlookers seemed to be saying; this was the Olympic spirit incarnate. 
Akhwari finished in 3:25:27 more than 19 minutes behind the previous runner. 
Later, when asked why he refused to drop out, given his severe injuries, Akhwari said, "My country did not send me 11,000 kilometers to start the Olympic Marathon. They sent me here to finish it." 
Burning Bright! 40 years after his last-place run, Akhwari took part in the torch run prior to the Beijing Games.
1972, Munich: The Case of the Masquerading Marathoner 
The victory lap is a tradition for Olympic champions！a postrace, wave-to-the-crowd celebration. 
Marathoners, however, use a different tack when taking a bow. 
If you've built a comfortable lead coming into the Olympic Stadium, you can relax and enjoy your victory even before reaching the finish. 
That's what American Frank Shorter was expecting to do at the end of his runaway win in Munich.
Racing in muggy conditions, Shorter totally outclassed the field. 
He surged hard and early to build a late-race lead of more than two minutes over such marathon titans as world record holder Derek Clayton, British star Ron Hill, and defending Olympic champ Mamo Wolde.
Shorter (left), 24 and born in Munich, looked forward to an appreciative greeting in the stadium. 
Instead, he was met by boos and angry whistling as he circled the oval. 
Unbeknownst to him, a complete impostor had bolted onto the track a half lap ahead. 
That's who the spectators were booing, but Shorter didn't realize this at first. He thought: Geez, I know I'm an American in Europe, but give me a break. 
Surprised but undeterred, Shorter completed his seemingly effortless lap of the stadium to cross the line in 2:12:20, just eight seconds shy of the Olympic record. 
Who's he? Shorter entered the stadium to boos. Only later did he learn they were for an imposter, Norbert Sudhaus.
1984, Los Angeles: Simply Staggering 
At the 1928 Amsterdam summer games, Olympic officials permitted women to try the 800-meter distance for the first time. 
The result was a disaster. Competing on a warm day, several of the women collapsed after finishing. 
The sight so disgusted Olympic decision-makers that they didn't allow women to run the 800 again until 1960. 
Good thing these same (male) officials didn't see the end of the first Olympic Women's Marathon in 1984.
Twenty minutes after Joan Benoit Samuelson won the historic gold medal, Gabriele Andersen Schiess lurched into the L.A. Coliseum in a frightful re-creation of the Dorando Pietri finish of 1908. 
Listing badly to her left, and staggering over four lanes of the track, the Swiss-born ski instructor from Idaho took more than five minutes to complete the final 400 meters, as a worldwide TV audience looked on in horror. 
Medical personnel observed her closely, but decided not to assist her, as that would have meant a disqualification. 
Andersen Schiess eventually got to the finish under her own power, and without ever collapsing. 
She placed 37th in 2:48:45. (Eight months earlier, she had won the first California International Marathon in 2:33:25.) 
Many watching feared for Andersen Schiess's health. Not an issue. Doctors released her shortly after her finish. 
A week later she ran a local race in Idaho.
Bend, But Not Break! 
Andersen Schiess listed and limped over the final lap, but did not collapse until after finishing.
2004, Athens: Collision Course 
The 2004 Athens Olympic Marathon should have been a celebration ！ a return of the Olympics to Athens for the first time since the 1896 Games, which concluded with the first-ever marathon footrace. 
However, the runners entered in the 2004 marathon faced their event with some trepidation. 
They were worried about the tough, mostly uphill course. And they absolutely dreaded the fierce heat of Athens in August. 
That said, no one gave a thought to deranged spectators?until they hit the 22-mile mark. 
That's where a 57-year-old defrocked Irish priest wearing a red kilt and green knee socks blazed across the street and shoved race leader Vanderlei de Lima into the crowd. 
It took de Lima, of Brazil, 15 seconds to free himself and return to action. 
Too late. The damage was done. 
"The attack really surprised me," he said later. 
"He did not injure me, but he broke my rhythm and I lost my concentration." 
In the last several miles, de Lima was passed by eventual winner Stefano Baldini of Italy and American Meb Keflezighi. Still, he ran strong enough to place third and gain the day's biggest finish-line reception. 
De Lima never ran another world-class marathon. 
His attacker, Cornelius Horan, was given a 12-month suspended sentence and a fine of 2,000 British pounds.
No Pushover! His gold-medal dreams shattered by a deranged spectator, de Lima was cited later for his exceptional sportsmanship.
2004, Athens: Greek Tragedy 
According to legend, Pheidippides died after completing the run from Marathon to Athens in 490 BC. 
In the 2004 Athens Olympic Marathon, England's Paula Radcliffe's mojo met a similar fate.
Radcliffe, 30, ranked among the most heavily favored runners in Olympic history. The year before, she had run an astonishing world record, 2:15:25, in the London Marathon. 
But on this day something went terribly wrong. 
Maybe it was the 95-degree temperature, or the long, grindingly uphill course, or simply the intense pressure. Radcliffe ran with the leaders through the halfway point, but couldn't match eventual winner Mizuki Noguchi of Japan on the toughest stretch of hills. 
