Obama, an economic unilateralist 
The silliest thing that clever people are saying about the world economic crisis is that the United States will lose its position as the dominant world superpower in consequence. 
On the contrary: the crisis strengthens the relative position of the United States and exposes the far graver weaknesses of all prospective competitors. 
It makes the debt of the American government the world's most desirable asset. 
America may deserve to decline, but as Clint Eastwood said in another context, "deserve's got nothing to do with it". 
President Barack Obama may turn out to be the most egregious unilateralist in American history.
America's supposed decline dominates the glossy magazines. 
Last September, Germany's Finance Minister Peer Steinbruck intoned, "One thing seems probable to me. As a result of the crisis, the United States will lose its status as the superpower of the global financial system."
The German official is quoted by Professor Richard Florida in the March 2009 Atlantic Monthly, who adds, "You don't have to strain too hard to see the financial crisis as the death knell for a debt-ridden, overconsuming and underproducing American empire - the fall long prophesied by [British historian] Paul Kennedy and others." (Florida's views are more nuanced).
And the ubiquitous Professor Niall Ferguson told a Vanity Fair interviewer on January 20 that America would crumble like Great Britain in the 1970s. "It certainly will be extremely painful ... Half the federal debt is held by foreigners. And if the US either defaults on debt or allows the dollar to depreciate, the rest of the world is going to say, 'Wait a second, you just screwed us.' And that's, I think, the moment at which the United States experiences the British experience - when, in the dark days of the 60s and 70s, Britain fundamentally lost its credibility and ceased to be a financial great power."
But is this true?
In fact, the rest of the world has queued up to lend America as much money as it might wish to borrow in order to get its consumers to spend again, and buy the manufactures and raw materials of the rest of the world. 
It won't work, but that is another matter.
Here's a thought-experiment to gauge the merits of different national markets as a safe haven. 
Close your eyes and try to imagine what Germany, Japan and China will look like 30 years from now, that is, when a newly-issued long-term bond will mature.
Imagination fails in the case of Europe and Japan. 
One out of every four Germans today is older than 60, and in 30 years the proportion will rise to two-fifths. 
Japan is even worse: 30% of Japanese today are above 60, and in 30 years the number will be almost half. 
What does a national economy look like when the demographics are so skewed to pensioners?
We never have seen anything like this before in all of history. 
Pension and health costs projected forward will crush these economies a generation from now. 
Taxes will suffocate the dwindling population of young workers. 
A straight-line projection of present trends takes us to the cusp of national failure. 
We do not know whether present trends will continue in a straight line, to be sure.
Children are the wealth of nations, provided that their nations can put tools in their hands and the rule of law at their back. 
Countries that lack children are poor. Aging Germans do not have young people to whom to lend. That is why they lent their savings to Americans, through the subprime market, and why European banks are if anything worse off than American banks.
Great opportunities are attended by enormous dangers. 
China has more young people than any other country in the world, more than all of Europe put together, but too many of them are trapped in rural poverty, uneducated and untrained.
That is why Chinese save half their income, more than anyone else in the world.
But America's future is not hard to visualize in 2040. 
In fact, America in 1979 was not much different from America in 2009. 
Minor adjustments await Americans over the next generation compared with the great changes affecting its prospective competitors.
During the 1960s, a young Canadian economist, Robert Mundell, argued that an increase in US government debt might represent a true increase in wealth under certain circumstances. 
It is relatively easy to capitalize corporate income streams through bonds, Mundell observed, but much harder to capitalize household income streams. 
If the government cuts taxes and issues bonds to replace the lost revenue, the increase in the float of the government bonds outstanding will represent an increase in wealth, provided that the tax increase stimulates growth, and the resulting growth brings in enough taxes to pay the interest on the bonds
From this insight emerged the economic program of president Ronald Reagan. 
Drastic tax cuts, reducing the marginal tax rate from 70% to 40%, vastly increased the US budget deficit during the early 1980s. But the increase in revenues from a recovering economy more than paid the interest on the additional bonds, and the increase in government debt represented an increase in wealth. 
