The Seduction of Safety, on Campus and Beyond
I HAVE been searching for safety for most of my life. 
I experienced a brutal assault when I was young and in that terrible moment, I learned I was vulnerable in unimaginable ways. 
I have come to crave safety, the idea that I can live free from physical or emotional harm. 
As an adult, I understand that there is no such thing as safety, that safety is promised to no one, but oh the idea of it remains so lovely, so elusive.
When it comes to human resilience, our culture has grand ideas about the nobility of hardship and suffering. 
¡°The world breaks every one, and afterward, many are strong at the broken places,¡± Ernest Hemingway wrote. And certainly, I became the woman I am today, for better and worse, because of the hardships I have endured. 
If I had to choose, though, I would prefer to have not lost my sense of safety in the way I did.
I am now always searching for safety, and I appreciate safe spaces ¡ª the ones I create for my students in a classroom, the ones I create with my writing and the ones others create, too ¡ª because there is so much unsafe space in this world.
This past week, the news media has energetically discussed student unrest at Yale and at the University of Missouri, where students are protesting administrative insensitivity or inaction in the face of troubled racial climates. 
At Mizzou, in particular, student activists have demanded safe space. 
A student journalist, Tim Tai, was denied access to the protesters¡¯ tent city in a public area of the campus. 
The protesters didn¡¯t want to be photographed or interviewed, possibly not trusting journalists to tell their story accurately.
The next day, they rightly changed their stance, opened their space to the media, and a debate on free speech and safe spaces found new life. 
Quickly, the student protesters were accused of not tolerating free speech in regard not only to Mr. Tai, but also to those who use racial epithets and otherwise engage in hate speech. 
They were accused of being weak, of being whiny for having the audacity to expect to attend college without being harassed for their blackness.
As a writer, I believe the First Amendment is sacred. 
The freedom of speech, however, does not guarantee freedom from consequence. 
You can speak your mind, but you can also be shunned. 
You can be criticized. 
You can be ignored or ridiculed. 
You can lose your job. 
The freedom of speech does not exist in a vacuum.
Many of the people who advocate for freedom of speech with the most bluster are willing to waste this powerful right on hate speech. 
But the beauty of the freedom of speech is that it protects us from subjectivity. 
We protect someone¡¯s right to shout hateful slurs the same way we protect someone¡¯s right to, say, criticize the government, or discuss her religious beliefs.
And so the students at Mizzou wanted a safe space to commune as they protested. 
They wanted sanctuary but had the nerve to demand this sanctuary in plain sight, in a public space. 
Rather than examine why the activists needed safe space, most people wrapped themselves in the Constitution, the path of less resistance. 
The students are framed as coddled infants, as if perhaps we should educate college students in a more spartan manner ¡ª placing classrooms in lions¡¯ dens.
Feminism is largely responsible for introducing safe space into our cultural vernacular as a means of fostering open, productive dialogue. 
In the late 1980s, queer groups began safe space programs that have since flourished on college campuses. 
