What next to tackle the riots? Curfew? Water cannon? The army? 
In the face of the riots, the beleaguered police are being bombarded as much with advice as they are with half-bricks and bottles. 
So what are the options being considered and would they really help to restore order to the streets?
The curfew
The aim would be to keep as many people off the street as possible to allow police to concentrate on picking off the trouble-makers. 
The acting Met commissioner, Tim Godwin, has called for a "voluntary" curfew imposed by local communities. 
The reality is that, voluntary or compulsory, it would be almost impossible to impose and to whom would it apply ÿ tourists? Night bus drivers? Cleaners? 
How would an overstretched force decide whom to challenge?
The water cannon
This has been suggested by Patrick Mercer, a Conservative MP and former army officer, on the grounds that it has been successfully deployed in Northern Ireland. 
The home secretary, Theresa May, has been adamant ÿ so far ÿ that it will not be deployed. 
The main reason for using it is that it can disperse crowds without causing serious injury. 
The arguments against are that there are few Met officers trained in using it and that, at the current rate of spiralling violence, it would be impossible to deploy effectively. 
Water cannon has mostly been used in dispersing people in contained spaces, not across a whole city.
The rubber or plastic bullet
Again, this is used in Northern Ireland and credited with dispersing crowds without fatalities. 
The Met's deputy assistant commissioner, Steve Kavanagh, has said that baton rounds ÿ plastic bullets ÿ could now be used: "If we need to, we will do so." 
But shots to the head from close range can kill. 
Again, as with water cannon, the police would struggle to get officers trained in the use of them to the scenes of violence. 
One problem is that both water cannon and plastic bullets might merely heighten the levels of excitement for the committed rioter and looter. 
And is Northern Ireland really an example of how to keep the peace?
The army
The doomsday scenario for London as it prepares for the Olympics. 
The army has been deployed in a civilian role during firefighters' strikes, but putting young squaddies up against their inner-city contemporaries would be a recipe for urban disaster on a scale more suitable for a graphic novel than reality.
Exactly 100 years ago, a home secretary was under pressure from the media and fellow politicians to act decisively against outrage on the streets of London. 
The perpetrators then were, at least, identifiable and containable and had been tracked down to Sidney Street in the East End. 
