When Home Becomes Hell
March 19, 2007 issue
- My Uncle Brahim is trapped inside his Baghdad home --- waiting to flee a country that six months ago he swore he'd never leave. 
With him are his wife, his hugely pregnant daughter and his 1-year-old grandson. 
I'm not sure how to say "cabin fever" in Arabic, but I'm pretty sure they have it. 
They've been holed up for months in that house as battles rage in and around their Mansour neighborhood. 
I can hear the anarchy outside their door when I called --- explosions, gunshots and, once, a scream. 
Still, my 77-year-old diabetic uncle greets me like the world is full of roses: "Habibi hiyati! [Love of my life!] How is my American girl?"
There seem to be a billion obstacles between Brahim's family and escape. 
They're still waiting on their new Iraqi passports, even though Brahim applied months ago. 
And who will watch their house of 45 years and all their belongings inside? 
Then there's the question of where to go. 
Jordan and Syria are already swamped with Iraqi refugees and have tightened, if not sealed off, their borders. 
It's clear that Brahim and his family waited too long, and now things are desperate. 
"I think maybe we will try Bulgaria, Loreen," he says. 
"My son-in-law knows a person there, and I hear they are excellent for the clinic of diabetes."
Baghdad or Bulgaria? This is what it's come to for thousands of families like ours. 
Most everyone from my dad's side of the family (whose names I've changed for security reasons) lived in the Iraqi capital up until 2003. 
But now, if they're not hiding out in their homes, they're struggling to adjust to life somewhere else. 
Brahim's middle daughter, Mahia, is in Amman with her three young kids. 
Her sister Lulu is in Germany with her husband and baby. 
My late Aunt Fatima's son Sami fled to southern Iraq when his Baghdad home was seized by insurgents. He's now looking to move to Egypt or even Sweden. 
His brilliant geologist sister Silma left her upscale Baghdad home and is now stuffed into a tiny apartment in Amman with her husband, Omar, and three teenagers. 
Uncle Hassan's daughter Loubna, once a curator for the museum of Baghdad, fled to Syria. So did her brother.
But their sister never arrived. She was killed on the road from Baghdad to Damascus. 
Three more distant relatives were never afforded the chance to flee§Ó?¡±or turn 25. They were brutally murdered, their mutilated bodies dumped in the streets of Baghdad.
Those cousins who have made it out of Iraq alive are part of the fastest-growing refugee crisis in the world. 
An estimated 2.3 million Iraqis have fled the country since the 2003 invasion. They represent the largest displacement of people in the region since the Palestinian diaspora nearly a half century ago. 
About 50,000 people escape Baghdad each month. 
