All the Queen's strength is built on Philip's enduring love
Look back over the centuries at Britain's greatest constitutional monarchs and a common theme soon emerges: their reign was also a love story. It is what separates George III, Victoria, George V and George VI from the rest.
And it has never been more true than in the case of our present Queen who, a few weeks from now, will become only the second monarch in our history to mark 60 years on the throne.
Just as the phrase 'Victoria and Albert' has entered the language and tripped off the tongue for years, so, I believe, future generations will talk of 'Elizabeth and Philip'. 
Prince Philip, with the Queen, was taken to hospital as a precautionary measure, according to Buckingham Palace.
Ask any good friend of the Royal Family for the secret of the Queen's enduring resilience and you will usually get the same response: 'Good health, a strong faith and Prince Philip.'
That is why there has been such concern and, latterly, such relief in the past three days. 
More...Royal Family attend Christmas Day service at Sandringham as Duke of Edinburgh recovers in hospital from heart operation. Queen says Royal Wedding was 'a personal reminder of the value of loved ones' as the world goes through 'difficult times' in poignant Christmas Day message This reign has been a team effort from the very start.
And the Duke of Edinburgh's heart scare, as the Royal Family gathered for Christmas at Sandringham, was not just a threat to a much-loved paterfamilias but to the whole team as well.
Like any couple who have celebrated a diamond wedding anniversary, the Queen and the Duke have been through the peaks and troughs of family life.
But in their case, those moments have been enjoyed or endured in the public gaze --- and for more than 60 years.
And when we look back on the Queen's reign, we can see moments which we might now take for granted but which, at the time, could have unhinged a lesser mortal. 
Double act: The Duke and the Queen wave farewell to Australia at Perth International Airport One can point, for example, to any number of personal setbacks during that dire five-year spell between the 'annus horribilis' of 1992 and the death of Diana, Princess of Wales in 1997.
These were moments of great personal stress yet the Queen sailed through them all, holding her composure and her nerve, not least because there was always her 'liege man of life and limb' to whom she could turn.
Whenever events might have conspired against her, there was the other member of the team at her side.
To this day, for all her experience, you will still see the Queen cast an eye across a chaotic walkabout just to check that the Duke is at hand.
He, in turn, will be working his way through the crowd, bringing the smallest children across to the Queen and checking that her armfuls of flowers are being efficiently conveyed to the royal convoy.
One of the reasons that the Queen enjoyed her recent tour of Australia so much was that the Duke was on cracking form. His mood can lift any atmosphere.
The Queen is not one of life's attention-seekers.
While her late mother was a natural performer, the Monarch is, by nature, more reserved --- like her late father.
In another existence, she would never have sought the spotlight which fell on her at birth and which has intensified with time.
Yet this shy, cautious person has had to take centre stage at countless historic world events --- leading the country in prayer and remembrance, serving as the focal point for national emotions at any given time.
It has been a very tall order, but she has accomplished it with such style and dignity that she is not only the most famous but, arguably, the most respected woman on the planet.
And there is little doubt what underpins that inner confidence, that stoical devotion to duty. 
Team: Prince Philip and the Queen leave Buckingham Palace in an open carriage to attend the ceremony of Trooping the Colour in 2004.
 In the course of researching my new portrait of the Monarch, Our Queen, I spoke to many friends of the couple.
As one put it: 'There are some people who don't need many friends.
And those two, they're just a real love story --- taking tea together every day, talking about everything.
He might take out a letter and read it to her, or crack a joke.
They just adore each other.' 
This weekend's visits to Papworth Hospital were not simply to cheer up the Duke.
A famously bad patient who hates the idea of being a nuisance, he is not one for bedside visitors.
Indeed, the last time he was in hospital for any length of time --- in 2008 --- the only people he wanted to see were members of staff bearing correspondence, speeches, research papers and so on. 
No, these Christmas visits have been as much about lifting the Queen's spirits as about bolstering the patient.
This is always a time of year which emphasises the importance of families but, for the Royal Family, Christmas is also a time which emphasises the importance of the Duke. 
Soon after she succeeded to the Throne, the Queen put the Duke in charge of the royal estates at Sandringham and Balmoral.
They are private spaces where he can exercise his formidable intellect and his love of ideas without any of the constitutional restrictions which apply at Buckingham Palace.
Everything from the new wood-chip boilers which have been powering the royal central heating this Christmas to the accelerated composter which recycles all the leftovers in the Sandringham visitors' restaurant have been the Duke's projects.
No one has a greater knowledge of the way the place works.
He will know exactly which game birds are up or down in which part of the estate.
He will be more delighted than anyone when Sandringham's experimental truffle farm finally produces its first truffle. 
It was the Duke who installed some of Britain's very first solar panels on a Sandringham farmhouse back in the Seventies. 
His imprint is stamped all over those 20,000 acres. And it has made his absence even more pronounced.
'Everyone has had a nasty scare,' says one official. 'This has been such a successful year that many people have been saying: "Aren't they amazing; aren't they invincible?"  Well, now we have had a sudden reminder that they are also very precious and we need to take care of them.' 
Focused: The Queen and the Duke listening to a speech by King Constantine of the Hellenes at Wellington College, Crowthorne, Berkshire this year.
Certainly, it is unlikely that the Queen is going to allow the Duke to put together a schedule like the one he had arranged for himself a few weeks ago.
Having returned from that Australian tour late on a Saturday night, he had been due to fly to Italy the following Monday morning, by easyJet, for a conference involving one of the many global organisations he himself has founded.
However, the visit was cancelled because he had developed a cold.
Nonetheless, a day later he was helping the Queen host a major dinner.
The next evening, he attended a Trinity House dinner in his honour and, the following morning, he was receiving a delegation from the British Sub-Aqua Club before an engagement at Westminster Abbey. 
By the next week, the schedule was back to normal --- receptions for his Duke of Edinburgh Award scheme and the Diplomatic Corps, a day-trip to Margate and so on.
We have seen the Queen and the Duke perform such duties for so long that we regard such stamina as entirely normal (they themselves would probably see it that way, too).
But it is, of course, not remotely normal for a nonagenarian.
And next year's Diamond Jubilee celebrations, which begin in a matter of weeks, will place considerable extra demands on the couple. 
Earlier this month, it was announced that they would tour every region of the UK between March and the end of July (when the Queen will open the Olympics) but that they would leave the international celebrations to the younger members of the family.
The wisdom of that decision is beyond doubt.
The schedule is still a daunting one, with many nights spent aboard the Royal Train and walkabouts planned from Cornwall to the Highlands.
The central weekend, with its Thames pageant, pop concert and carriage procession across London will be every bit as momentous as the Olympics. 
That the Queen and her staff can approach it all so calmly and confidently is down to the assumption that all will be well with the Duke at her side.
Elizabeth and Philip are a pair whose world view was shaped by war and whose wedding, in 1947, was governed by austerity.
They have embraced change and new ideas with more enthusiasm than any of their predecessors.
Yet they still retain the natural reticence and modesty of their generation.
Their love for one another, while blindingly obvious, is seldom discussed in public. 
But, very occasionally, we are given a glimpse of the depth of those feelings.
Having just endured the most trying five years of her reign ?? and just two months after the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales ?? the Queen made a speech to mark her Golden Wedding anniversary in November 1997.
Her words on that occasion could just as well be uttered today: 'All too often, I fear, Prince Philip has had to listen to me speaking.
Frequently we have discussed my intended speech beforehand and, as you will imagine, his views have been expressed in a forthright manner.
'He is someone who doesn't take easily to compliments but he has, quite simply, been my strength and stay all these years, and I, and his whole family, and this and many other countries, owe him a debt greater than he would ever claim, or we shall ever know.'
