Mikhail Gorbachev: The man who changed the world 
Mikhail Gorbachev is still a man who strides the global stage §§C and maintains a keen interest in domestic politics. 
He talks to Ginny Dougary about power, presidents, Putin and life after Raisa
Mikhail Gorbachev's reforms led to the fall of the Berlin Wall and break-up of the USSR 
Mikhail Gorbachev may be pushing 80 but when he talks, people still listen, particularly (or, perhaps, exclusively) outside his own country, and that includes the 44th president of the United States. 
The first and last President of the former Soviet Union is telling me about his meeting with Barack Obama, during the latter's extended honeymoon period, not so long ago, when he said: "'I congratulate you because two months after the election your popularity was growing and your popularity is still growing.' 
He looked at me and said, 'Just you wait, it'll go down.'" A gusty blast of a laugh. 
"And I liked him saying that."
The man who was determined to modernise the USSR through glasnost and perestroika (the last time Russian words tripped off the tongue), which led to its collapse and transformed the world beyond, is now greatly in demand as a speaker in the United States. 
He remembers one particular lecture, three years ago during the Bush administration, when he was faced with the following question: "What would you recommend for America now that we are in a very difficult situation?" "I said, 'Well, to give advice to other countries, particularly to Americans, would be wrong. 
It's for you to sort out what you need to do.' 
But nevertheless, they said, 'What's your advice?'
"And I said, 'When we were putting an end to the Cold War, we said that the world needs to rethink old problems. 
We need to understand where we are. 
We need to start thinking about the fact that half the population of the world lives on one or two dollars a day. 
Sixty per cent of the ecosystems have been broken. 
The atmosphere has been polluted. Oceans and rivers have been polluted. 
If we just leave it as it is, if we just continue down this path, then this will end very badly. 
We were saying that every country needs to change.'
"I said to those Americans who were asking my advice, 'You had this euphoria of victory, of the West winning the Cold War. 
You thought that you did not need any changes because everything was going so well for the West. 
But after the euphoria will come disappointment and you're already seeing that it was a mistake to glory in that victory. 
So if you insist on me giving advice, I will certainly not give you a kind of menu or a timetable for change, but I do believe that what America needs is its own perestroika.'"
So are you saying that Obama is the new you? "Let me finish. 
Both me and my translator [Pavel Palazchenko, who has worked with Gorbachev for years, and attended the US-Soviet summit talks that led to the end of the Cold War] were amazed when that huge audience, about 10,000 people, gave me a standing ovation and I said to my translator, 'There is something happening in America. 
Change will come to America.' 
And the most important thing is that Obama identified that need for change. It's the challenge that he felt and I really give him a lot of credit for that. 
I like him also because he's very intelligent and very democratically minded --- which, of course, doesn't mean that he doesn't have firmness, because he does. He also has the will."
Gorbachev may be our favourite Russian export but our desire to transform him into a cuddly international treasure --- how stern can a man be, one might think, who tolerates his universal nickname "Gorby"? --are wide of the mark.
He talks in a series of speeches, brooking no interruptions, which means our interview is peppered with impatient slap-downs: "I have not yet finished," and "Let me say something first and then I'll reply."
It's hard to know whether it is Gorbachev or his interpreter who is responsible for the occasional brusqueness of tone. 
At one point, when I am saying that if he wants to criticise the British as well as the Americans, go ahead, I have broad shoulders, his answer sounds quite rude: "So what? 
I'm sure you would find things to say to Russia so I am very frank to you..."
I ask him what has been his proudest moment and he says, "Pride is not really my feeling," and then goes on at such length, taking in what seems to be the whole history of the 20th century, that I must have conveyed my feeling of despair. (Burying my head in my hands may have been the giveaway.) What is so frustrating is that, of all the notable figures I have interviewed, Gorbachev is the one who has done most to change the map of the world. 
I have so many questions but only a scant hour in which to put them. 
An attempt to sway him by saying he is a historical figure fails §§C "Don't consign me to history" §§C but it does make him smile. 
Living history, I mean. "OK, if it's living history, I accept that." 
Later, he says: "You know, Chekhov said that one has to speak very briefly but ---" You are, perhaps, more like Tolstoy, is my attempt at a Russian joke, which falls flat.
What is startling, from someone whose name is synonymous with attempting to effect far-reaching change in his own country, and who is still outspoken (although not enough for some) about its failings under Medvedev and Putin, is how angry Gorbachev feels about outsiders' criticism. "The British, the Americans want us to be like them," he says. 
"First of all, that shouldn't be the demand, I guess, we never demanded others be like us. 
There should be competition and exchanges between different countries, but there are certainly certain universal values and that is freedom and democracy. 
We still have a way to go towards implementing those values and we can be quite critical in our own country about many things.
"We are seeing ourselves that there is still a lot to be done by us to achieve democracy. 
And so I say to Americans: 'You want us to be like you but I can tell you, it took you 200 years to build your democracy yet you want us to do the same thing in 200 days.' 
And I say, 'Well, I know we are more talented than you are, but not as much as that.' And they understand, they react to this."
He says that Russians continue to be misunderstood, maybe wilfully so. 
"My first book as General Secretary was calledPerestroika: New Thinking for Our Country and the World, and its first sentence was, 'We want to be understood.' 
Even now, we want to be understood. 
And there are quite a few people for whom Russia is a hindrance, a problem, which is crazy."
Can you be more specific? 
"Let me give you some facts because you may think it's just words. 
During Yeltsin's time, when he abandoned the evolutionary path of reform and used cowboy methods, shock therapy that ruined the country's economy... 
Many people lost their jobs, and many people were not paid their wages or salary for months, sometimes years. 
During this time we had all those delegations of visitors coming to Russia and everyone applauded Yeltsin. 
I was watching this and I thought, 'Well, how can that be?' 
And I finally concluded that it was a kind of political activism at that time on the part of the people who actually enjoyed the fact that Russia was down.
"But you cannot put Russia down on its knees" --- a thump on the table--- "and hold it there because Russia will ultimately pull out. 
And it was that kind of attitude of the West towards Russia in the Nineties that changed the attitude of many Russians. 
The euphoria in favour of Europe and America disappeared when people saw that attitude, and it ruined the trust that existed. 
I think that was the most important thing."
In late 1992, I travelled through Russia with a British businessman who had lost his own empire in controversial circumstances and was attempting to restore his millions in the new frontier. 
What was most striking was the sense of a country in transition, hungry to embrace change and enjoy the free-market benefits speculative Westerners seemed eager to offer --- naturally, since there were profits to be made.
One of the business meetings took place in Brezhnev's old shooting lodge, and in the guest book was an inscription in a babyish, perhaps drunken, scrawl to the host: "Thank you very much. You are a good man. This is me. Yeltsin. November 1991." (The year he was elected President.)
 In 1993, a year after my trip, Yeltsin was impeached after relations between the President and parliament had collapsed. There was a ten-day conflict with the deadliest street fights in Moscow since 1917. 
On New Year's Eve, 1999, Yeltsin offered a surprise resignation and announced Putin as his successor.
Gorbachev initially supported Putin, and still does apparently (he backed Russia's role in last year's war with Georgia, for instance), but this has not stopped his candid criticism at various points. 
In 2005, Pravda reported him commenting on a controversial reform (abolishing?communist-era entitlements to benefits?) that enraged pensioners: "Law-makers did not think about people, when they were discussing the law. Public organisations, science §§C everything has been left aside. 
In my opinion, such an approach to elderly people can evoke only for normal people."
Yet in 2007, he endorsed Putin as President in the parliamentary elections: "It is a fact that within Russia, Putin is supported by up to 80 per cent of the population. [When Gorbachev last ran for President in 1996, he won only 0.5 per cent of the vote.] For me that is a more persuasive argument as I live in Russia. 
He has brought stabilisation to Russia. 
Not everyone would have been able to cope with the kind of legacy that he inherited from Boris Yeltsin."
This was the year that Gordon Brown expelled four Russian diplomats in response to Moscow's refusal to allow the extradition of Andrei Lugovoy, the man suspected of poisoning Alexander Litvinenko §§C the former KGB officer who had accused the Russian secret services of staging various terrorism acts in order to bring Putin to power. 
The Russian foreign ministry described the action as "immoral" and "provocative". 
Brown said he wouldn't allow "lawlessness" to take a grip in London. 
It was the first time in 11 years that Russian officials had been thrown out of Britain and marked the biggest chill in relations since the end of the Cold War. 
Lugovoy, a businessman and politician who has always denied any involvement in the murder, remains in Russia where he enjoys immunity from prosecution.
In 2006, Anna Politkovskaya, the Russian journalist and human rights activist, was shot dead in the lift of her apartment block. She had made her name reporting from Chechnya, and was a well-known critic of the conflict and Putin's role in it. 
In January this year, her lawyer was assassinated. No one has been convicted of either murder.
Earlier this year, in a stinging rebuke, Gorbachev denounced Putin and his United Russia Party as "the party of bureaucrats and the worst version of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union". 
But why was he not more damning of Putin two years earlier? Was he, perhaps, fearful of what might happen to him or his family?
