Did American conservationists in Africa go too far?
In the early nineteen-seventies Mark and Delia Owens two graduate students in biology at the University of Georgia were seized by the idea of resettling in remotest Africa. 
They organized an auction sold their possessions and used the modest proceeds to buy camping equipment and a pair of one-way air tickets to Johannesburg. 
When they arrived in January 1974 Delia the daughter of a Georgia trucking executive was twenty-four years old. 
Mark who grew up on a farm west of Toledo Ohio was twenty-nine the divorced father of a four-year-old boy named Christopher.
Mark and Delia had scoured the map of Africa searching for a site so isolated that its wildlife would have no knowledge and no fear of humans. 
They eventually found their way to a place called Deception Valley in the Kalahari Desert of Botswana. 
It was a perfect spot for the Owenses to make camp. 
The wildlife there had not been depleted by poaching as it had been in other parts of Africa and though the valley was in many ways an unforgiving place --- temperatures can climb above a hundred and twenty degrees in summer--- it was distant enough from the capital Gaborone to insure that they would be left alone to do their work. 
The Kalahari is virtually empty of people:
the Owenses later wrote of living with only "a few bands of Stone Age Bushmen in an area larger than Ireland." 
In their book "Cry of the Kalahari " which was published in 1984 the Owenses described their dreadful living conditions: "We rationed ourselves to seven gallons of water each per week for bathing cooking and drinking. 
The water from the drums tasted like hot metallic tea and to cool it for drinking we filled tin dinner plates and set them in the shade of the acacia. 
But if we didn't watch it closely the water would quickly evaporate or collect bees twigs and soil. 
After washing the dishes we took sponge baths in the dishwater then strained the coffee-colored liquid through a cloth into the truck's radiator."
Despite penury loneliness and drought they established a viable research station and over several years they gained the trust of several prides of lions and clans of brown hyenas. 
In the manner of Jane Goodall Dian Fossey and Joy and George Adamson the Owenses spent thousands of hours recording the smallest details of their subjects' behavior. 
Early on Mark Owens went to South Africa to learn how to pilot small airplanes and the Frankfurt Zoological Society which became the Owenses' most important sponsor gave him money for a single-engine Cessna. 
He used the plane to make aerial surveys of the Kalahari's wildlife and he and Delia conducted close observation of the social life of hyenas learning about their surprisingly communal behavior. 
By writing about the exploits of these predators in vivid and accessible prose they attracted popular attention and funding for their work. 
They cultivated reporters who came to Deception Valley and told their story not as one simply of carnivore research but as a tale of young love in a hard land.
In "Kalahari Romance " an article Mark Owens published in International Wildlife he described his ideal day: "We land in the grass most likely in a place never visited by modern man and sleep in the open under the wing. 
Now and then we wake to watch the gentle sweep of the Southern Cross through the sky. 
Knowing that no one on Earth knows where we are or could ever find us we feel special as if we are the only two people in the universe."
But eventually the complexities of the human world would intrude. 
One day while flying over the central Kalahari Mark Owens came across an enormous migration of wildebeest. 
He followed the path of the migration until to his bewilderment the animals suddenly stopped. 
Stretched before them was a steel-wire fence more than a hundred miles long erected by the government of Botswana to prevent the spread of foot-and-mouth disease to the country's cattle. 
Many animals had died of dehydration and carcasses were strewn on the ground. 
As the surviving wildebeest funnelled along the fence in search of water they entered a hunting area where poachers lay in wait. 
As Owens looked on the poachers killed animals en masse.
"We watched through binoculars as the slaughter continued along the shore " Owens wrote in "Cry of the Kalahari." 
"Trembling with rage I pushed the control wheel forward and we plunged toward the lakeshore. 
The poachers were preoccupied with their butchery and did not see the aircraft until it was at ground level roaring across the plain toward them at 160 miles an hour."
Mark and Delia urged government ministers and game-management officials to protect the animals but their pleas were rejected. 
"Almost everyone we knew told us to forget it. 
¡° ¡®Cattle is too big an industry; you'll never get them to take down the fences ' " they wrote. 
"Since no one within the country would listen to our recommendations we decided to try to publicize the issue worldwide to enlist the support of prominent people outside the country who perhaps could encourage the Botswana government to review the problem."
One day government officials in Gaborone summoned Mark and Delia to a meeting. 
When they arrived they were told that they were being expelled from the country. 
Botswana was a major exporter of beef to Europe and the government was embarrassed by the Owenses' campaign. 
According to Jonathan S. Adams and Thomas O. McShane's book "The Myth of Wild Africa " Quett Masire the President of Botswana at the time said of the Owenses "If you cannot operate within the bounds of government whom you are a guest of in this country to work these issues out then work elsewhere."
The Owenses felt roughly handled. 
Mark Owens later told People "They fingerprinted us threatened us treated us like criminals. 
We weren't allowed to call the Embassy or get a lawyer. 
We lost everything. 
It took a lot of healing to get over it." 
By then the Owenses had finished their graduate studies (Mark earned an M.Ed. and Delia a Ph.D.) and gained some renown for their work. 
After they returned to the U.S. they enlisted a number of politicians --- several congressmen; Andrew Young then the mayor of Atlanta; and Vice-President George H. W. Bush --- to lobby the government of Botswana to reverse its decision. 
Months passed before Botswana did so and in the meantime the Owenses searched for another game park in which they could continue their research on large mammals.
In the Northern Province of Zambia they discovered a place that seemed to fit their needs. 
The North Luangwa National Park named for the river that forms its eastern boundary is twenty-four hundred square miles of mopane forests grasslands leadwood and sausage trees and lagoons filled with hippos and crocodiles. 
Outside its borders is more wilderness thousands of square miles of forests and plains inhabited like the park by a great range of Africa's most extraordinary mammals. 
The profusion of wildlife has made the Luangwa Valley a dangerous place for humans. 
Each year crocodiles elephants and lions kill dozens of people who live in the mud-hut villages that are scattered across the region.
By the time the Owenses arrived in 1986 North Luangwa was in their telling a national park in name only undeveloped unvisited unguarded and inaccessible by vehicle for much of the year because of flooding. 
Mark Owens said of the park "Here's where civilization ends." In a lecture at the National Geographic Society in Washington D.C. in 2006 he described the challenge of settling in North Luangwa. "We had to first survey a way in from the air. 
And we found an old poachers' route that snaked its way down the three-thousand-foot Muchinga Escarpment " he said. 
"So we set about doing that . . . encountering creeks and rivers and streams of course that had to be crossed. And no way to cross except these footbridges."
In "The Eye of the Elephant " the book the Owenses published in 1992 about their experience in Zambia they described the moment they realized that they could find contentment in North Luangwa. 
They were visiting the confluence of the Mwaleshi and Luangwa Rivers for the first time. 
"The floodplains near and far are spotted with wild animals: six hundred buffalo grazing across a grassy plain; fifty zebras ambling toward the river to drink; a herd of waterbuck lying on a sandbar downstream " Mark wrote. 
"Where the two rivers join is a large pool crowded with a hundred hippos their piggy eyes on us their nostrils blowing plumes of water in the setting sun as they twiddle their ears. 
After our tangle with the bramble and the broken woodland Africa has won us back."
But within days of making the torturously slow descent from the escarpment down to the river basin they found evidence of rampant poaching. 
In "The Eye of the Elephant " in which Delia and Mark write alternating chapters Mark Owens told of a terrible discovery:
"Mark look over there!" I stop the truck and we walk to a thin grove of trees near the edge of the dead woodland. 
Five elephant skulls bone white and half the size of bathtubs are scattered about the area with pelvises leg bones ribs shoulder blades and other remains. 
Horrified we notice skeletons lying everywhere: one here five over there six there.
"The bastards!" I kick the dust. . . .
Now we understand why we have not seen a single living elephant or a sign of one in the eight days since we entered the park. We are standing in the midst of a killing field. . . . 
Although we have not yet run into poachers it must be only a matter of time until we do. 
There will be no ignoring them running from them pretending they do not exist. 
If we stay here to work we will have to do something about them.
When they finally did see a small family of elephants by a river they noticed their skittishness. 
"The elephants are so frightened by humans that they will not drink " Mark wrote. 
"At this moment in August of 1986 we pledge to each other: no matter what it takes or how long we will stay in North Luangwa until the elephants come to drink at the river in peace."
In the late nineteen-seventies and early eighties there was a spike in the killing of Africa's savanna elephants caused largely by increased demand in Asia for ivory carvings. 
In 1979 there were about a million three hundred thousand elephants in Africa; ten years later the population had fallen by half. 
By the late eighties some countries including Kenya had found the problem serious enough to institute a shoot-to-kill policy allowing poachers to be shot on sight. 
Zambia which had no such official policy was heavily afflicted by poaching. 
Its central government was corrupt in places and ineffective at policing the country's distant corners. 
For poachers North Luangwa's isolation made it a favored hunting ground.
Hunters had always taken game in North Luangwa but they mainly "shot for the pot " killing animals to feed their families. 
Until the arrival of the British in the early nineteen-hundreds there were several villages of the Bisa and Bemba tribes in the North Luangwa wilderness. 
The animals that lived among them --- wildebeest warthogs impala elephants and buffalo --- were their only source of protein; livestock could not coexist with the tsetse flies that are endemic to the area. 
The British expelled the villagers from the valley in order to create the game reserve but the Bisa and Bemba who were relocated to the Muchinga Escarpment continued to visit the park to hold religious ceremonies at tribal burial sites and to hunt on ancestral lands. 
These hunters like many in Zambia did not consider what they did poaching and they resented the imposition of Western notions of animal welfare and animal rights on their societies.
