THE ENGLISH WARS¡ª¡ª The battle over the way we should speak.
For a long time, many English speakers have felt that the language was going to the dogs.
All around them, people were talking about ¡°parameters¡± and ¡°life styles,¡± saying ¡°disinterested¡± when they meant ¡°uninterested,¡± ¡°fulsome¡± when they meant ¡°full.¡±
To the pained listeners, it seemed that they were no longer part of this language group.
To others, the complainers were fogies and snobs.
The usages they objected to were cause not for grief but for celebration. They were pulsings of our linguistic lifeblood, proof that English was large, contained multitudes.
The second group was right about the multitudes.
English is a melding of the languages of the many different peoples who have lived in Britain; it has also changed through commerce and conquest.
English has always been a ragbag, and that encouraged further permissiveness.
In the past half century or so, however, this situation has produced a serious quarrel, political as well as linguistic, with two combatant parties: the prescriptivists, who were bent on instructing us in how to write and speak; and the descriptivists, who felt that all we could legitimately do in discussing language was to say what the current practice was.
This dispute is the subject of ¡°The Language Wars: A History of Proper English¡± (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux), by the English journalist Henry Hitchings, a convinced descriptivist.
In England, the most important and thorough prescriptivist volume of the twentieth century was ¡°A Dictionary of Modern English Usage,¡± written by H. W. Fowler, a retired schoolteacher, and published in 1926. Its first edition is seven hundred and forty-two pages long, and much of it has to do with small questions of spelling and pronunciation.
Fowler¡¯s true subject, however¡ªhis heart¡¯s home¡ªis a set of two general principles, clarity and unpretentiousness, that he felt should govern all use of language.
The book¡¯s fame derives from the articles he wrote in relation to those matters¡ª¡°genteelism,¡± ¡°mannerisms,¡± ¡°irrelevant allusion,¡± ¡°love of the long word,¡± to name a few.
Fowler defines ¡°genteelism¡± as ¡°the substituting, for the ordinary natural word that first suggests itself to the mind, of a synonym that is thought to be less soiled by the lips of the common herd, less familiar, less plebian, less vulgar, less improper, less apt to come unhandsomely betwixt the wind &amp; our nobility.¡±
As is obvious here, Fowler was dealing not just with language but with its moral underpinnings, truth and falsehood.
To many people, he seemed to offer an idealized view of what it meant to be English¡ªdecency, fair play, roast beef¡ªand to recommend, even to prescribe, those things.
Accordingly, Hitchings deplores the book.
England did not.
¡°A Dictionary of Modern English Usage¡± sold sixty thousand copies in its first year.
Its most famous descendant was George Orwell¡¯s 1946 essay ¡°Politics and the English Language.¡±
Published just after the Second World War¡ªthat is, just after most of the world had been nearly destroyed by ideologues¡ªthe essay said that much political language, by means of circumlocution and euphemism and other doctorings, was ¡°designed to make lies sound truthful and murder respectable.¡±
(Orwell repeated the point three years later, in ¡°1984.¡±)
Orwell was thus the most urgent prescriptivist possible.
To him, our very lives depended on linguistic clarity.
Hitchings nods at Orwell respectfully but still has questions about the campaign for plain English to which the great man contributed so heavily.
What the plain-English manifestos have been to Britain, ¡°The Elements of Style,¡± by William Strunk, Jr., and E. B. White, is to the United States.
Strunk was an English professor at Cornell, and ¡°The Elements of Style¡± began life as a forty-three-page pamphlet that he wrote in 1918 and distributed to his students in the hope of reforming what he saw as their foggy, verbose, and gutless writing.
His goals were the same as Fowler¡¯s: clarity and unpretentiousness.
He also had a mania for conciseness.
A year after the pamphlet appeared, E. B. White, the twenty-year-old son of a piano manufacturer, enrolled in Strunk¡¯s course.
After graduation, he forgot his professor¡¯s manual for many years, during which time he became a professional essayist, renowned for his clarity and unpretentiousness.
Then, one day, a friend from college sent him a copy of Strunk¡¯s pamphlet, thinking that it might amuse him.
Impressed by his old teacher¡¯s wisdom, White agreed to revise the manual for readers of his own time.
The volume, now widely known as ¡°Strunk and White,¡± was published in 1959.
It is not without faults: the passive voice, frowned on in the book, occurs eleven times just on page 16 of the fourth edition.
Nevertheless, ¡°The Elements of Style¡± is the most trusted style manual in the United States.
White appended an essay to the manual, ¡°An Approach to Style,¡± which carried the question of usage beyond correctness, into art.
After the book¡¯s many pages of rules, he says that excellence in writing depends less on following rules than on ¡°ear,¡± the sense of what sounds right.
Also, White stressed morals even more than Fowler did. ¡°Style takes its final shape more from attitudes of mind than from principles of composition,¡± he says.
¡°This moral observation would have no place in a rule book were it not that style is the writer, and therefore what a man is, rather than what he knows, will at last determine his style.¡±
In short, to write well, you had to be a good person.
Strunk and White, together with Fowler and, to some extent, Orwell, addressed their remarks to people who were of their own social class, or who at least had had an education similar to theirs. Hence their ease, their wit, and their willingness to prescribe.
None of them had any interest in telling steelworkers how to use English.
But in the middle of the twentieth century their prescriptivist assumptions came up against violent opposition, at least in the academic world.
The newly popular theory of structural linguistics held, in part, that you couldn¡¯t legislate language.
It had its own, internal rules. The most you could do was catalogue them.
A second important objection came from the reform politics of the late twentieth century. In a world changed by immigration, and intolerant of the idea of an ¨¦lite, many people felt that prescriptive style manuals were exclusionary, even cruel.
Why should we let some old Protestant men tell us how to write our language?
Also on the level of taste and tone, the books seemed to some readers¡ªfor example, Hitchings¡ªprovincial and small-minded.
¡°The idea of Fowler,¡± he writes, ¡°is part of that nimbus of Englishness that includes a fondness for flowers and animals, brass bands, cups of milky tea, net curtains, collecting stamps, village cricket, the quiz and the crossword.¡±
The idea of Strunk and White, too, was a little discomforting.
The book became a cult object.
A ballet based on it, by Matthew Nash, had its New York premi¨¨re in 1981.
Nico Muhly composed a song cycle on the subject, and performed it at the New York Public Library in 2005, in conjunction with the publication of Maira Kalman¡¯s illustrated edition of ¡°Elements.¡±
In 2009, Mark Garvey, a journalist, brought out a book, ¡°Stylized: A Slightly Obsessive History of Strunk &amp; White¡¯s The Elements of Style,¡± that quotes the correspondence between White and his publishers, reproduces testimonials by celebrated writers, and describes Garvey¡¯s feelings¡ªall his feelings¡ªabout the book: ¡°I love its trim size. I love the trade dress of the 1979 third edition: The authors¡¯ last names fill the top half of the honey-mustard cover in a stocky, crimson, sans serif typeface.¡±
For some, such fetishism was a bit nauseating¡ªand also clubbish.
Strunk and White could be associated with what some readers saw as the pipe-and-slippers tone of The New Yorker, where White was a celebrated contributor for decades.
The crucial document of the language dispute of the past half century was Webster¡¯s Third New International Dictionary, published in 1961.
This 2,662-page revised edition of the standard unabridged dictionary of American English was emphatically descriptivist.
¡°Ain¡¯t¡± got in, as did ¡°irregardless.¡± ¡°Like¡± could be used as a conjunction, as in ¡°Winston tastes good like a cigarette should.¡±
Some of these items had appeared in the preceding edition of the unabridged Webster¡¯s (1934), but with plentiful ¡°usage labels,¡± characterizing them as slang, humorous, erroneous, or illiterate.
In Web. III, usage labels appeared far less often; they bore more neutral names, such as ¡°nonstandard¡± and ¡°substandard¡±; and they were defined in subtly political terms.
¡°Substandard,¡± the dictionary tells us, ¡°indicates status conforming to a pattern of linguistic usage that exists throughout the American language community but differs in choice of word or form from that of the prestige group in that community.¡±
Two examples that the dictionary gave of words acceptable throughout the American language community except in its prestige group were ¡°drownded¡± and ¡°hisself.¡±
On many sides, Web. III was met with fury.
A number of readers had no memory of having heard ¡°drownded¡± or ¡°hisself¡± said by anyone, ever, prestigious or not.
Some people¡ªincluding the influential critic Dwight Macdonald, in an acidulous 1962 essay, ¡°The String Untuned¡±¡ªwent so far as to accuse the editors of equivocating, misleading, and concealing, for political reasons.
Even the middle-of-the-road Times ridiculed Web. III.
Rex Stout¡¯s beloved detective Nero Wolfe threw the book into the fire because of its failure to distinguish between ¡°imply¡± and ¡°infer.¡±
This was the closest thing to a public scandal that the quiet little world of English-language manuals had ever seen.
Out of it a new lexicon was born: the American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, published in 1969.
The A.H.D. was a retort to Web. III.
It was unashamedly prescriptive and also, strictly speaking, ¨¦litist.
In the words of its editor, William Morris, the book was written to provide ¡°that sensible guidance toward grace and precision which intelligent people seek in a dictionary.¡± Intelligent people, dictionary consulters: that¡¯s not everybody.
Still, A.H.D.¡¯s makers did their best to keep the doors open. They had put together a ¡°usage panel¡± of about a hundred people, mostly professional writers and editors, whom they consulted¡ªindeed, they asked them to vote¡ªon controversial words and phrases.
The editors then arrived at their decisions, but for many words they added not just a usage label but also a usage ¡°note,¡± giving the voting results, which were sometimes close.
Here, for instance, is the entry on ¡°ain¡¯t¡±: ¡°Nonstandard. Contraction of am not.¡±
But this is followed by an eighteen-line usage note, saying that while ¡°ain¡¯t¡± is strongly condemned, ¡°ain¡¯t I¡± is a little more tolerable than ¡°ain¡¯t¡± combined with any other word.
Actually, sixteen per cent of the panel thought that ¡°ain¡¯t I¡± was acceptable in speech.
(Don¡¯t try it in writing, though. Only one per cent approved this.)
Such polling could be viewed as a pre?mptive defense against a charge of exclusiveness, but it can also be seen as an attempt to purvey common sense, rather than snobbery or defensiveness, and, in the end, just to tell the truth.
In every quarter of the society, there is an ¨¦lite.
Web. III tried to make that fact go away. The A.H.D. did not, but it also demonstrated that occupants of the upper tier often¡ªeven usually¡ªdisagreed.
So this was an ¨¦lite that you might be able to join. It didn¡¯t have a secret code.
In making the case for the language as it was spoken, the descriptivists did one great service: they encouraged studies of the vernacular.
Dictionaries of slang have been around for a long time.
In 2010, the Bodleian Library, at Oxford, brought out what its editors claim is the first specimen, a 1699 volume entitled ¡°A New Dictionary of the Terms Ancient and Modern of the Canting Crew, In its Several Tribes, of Gypsies, Beggers, Thieves, Cheats, &amp;c.¡±¡ª¡°cant¡± means slang¡ªwhose author is listed only as B.E.