Dickens: Nightmare before Christmas 
Charles Dickens was driven by demons when he wrote his much-loved yuletide tales.
Award-winning author Justin Cartwright feels the pain 
When I was asked to choose one of Charles Dickens's books to write about for BBC Radio 3's The Essay series on 'the Writer's Dickens', I immediately picked A Christmas Carol, because Dickens's love of Christmas has always intrigued me.
It came as a surprise to learn that A Christmas Carol is his most read book and that 'Bah! Humbug!' is the best-known phrase in all his work.
Its popularity, I think, rests on the understanding that Christmas was deeply affecting to Charles Dickens and that A Christmas Carol was far more than a simple ghost story; it is trembling with emotions that come straight from the heart.
Dickens himself reported tears as he wrote it.
For him, I think, Christmas was a refuge from the memories that plagued him, memories of a childhood fraught with anxiety and mistreatment.
The horrors of the time he spent working in Warren's Blacking Warehouse grew in his memory and came to represent all his insecurities and all his longings.
He also came to idealise Christmas as a time of untrammelled happiness and peace, a respite in a harsh world.
From very early in Dickens's writing, Christmas is a favourite subject: Sketches by Boz of 1836, for example, has a story, 'A Christmas Dinner', which describes a family Christmas party during which old resentments are forgotten and old wounds healed.
Dickens wrote 'Christmas time!
That man must be a misanthrope indeed, in whose breast something like a jovial feeling is not roused ÿ in whose mind some pleasant associations are not awakened ÿ by the recurrence of Christmas.' 
The memory of a child who has died also features: this story is very obviously the progenitor of Tiny Tim and the genesis of A Christmas Carol.
As a result of the Puritan interregnum and the Industrial Revolution, the traditional Christmas had lost ground over nearly 200 years, but now, in the early 19th century, a revival was taking place, soon to be helped on its triumphant way by Prince Albert's introduction from Germany of the Christmas tree.
And Dickens was the high priest of the traditional Christmas.
In The Pickwick Papers, Dingley Dell is the setting for a demonstration of how one generation passes to another the traditions of Christmas, which Dickens regarded so highly, traditions that the Wardle family had observed, from ÿ as Dickens says ÿ time immemorial.
He paints a picture of a pre-industrial, even mediaeval, Christmas that places the happiness of the servants and the children at its heart.
And as he became wealthy, Dickens loved to be at the centre of Christmas, the master of the revels.
The whole family was enlisted to perform pieces he had written on Twelfth Night.It was clearly an antidote to his lifelong fear of poverty and disgrace, always a possibility in Victorian England, as his father had proved.
A Christmas Carol is about the working poor: Scrooge's nephew, Fred, and his clerk Bob Cratchit celebrate Christmas with a warm heart as best they can and they celebrate it for its own sake.
When Scrooge describes it as a whole day of making money lost, Fred says: 'I have always thought of Christmastime, when it has come round ÿ apart from the veneration due to its sacred name and origin, if anything belonging to it can be apart from that ÿ as a good time: a kind, forgiving, charitable, pleasant time: the only time I know of, in the long calendar of the year, when men and women seem by one consent to open their shut-up hearts freely, and to think of people below them as if they really were fellow-passengers to the grave, and not another race of creatures bound on other journeys.
And therefore, uncle, though it has never put a scrap of gold or silver in my pocket, I believe that it has done me good, and will do me good; and I say, God bless it!' 
This is the authentic voice of Dickens.
