Translating in the Dark 
¡°We must believe in poetry translation, if we want to believe in World Literature.¡± 
Thus Thomas Transtromer, the Swedish poet and winner of this year¡¯s Nobel Prize in Literature, quoted in a recent essay by Robert Robertson, one of his translators. 
Robertson goes on to describe the difficulties of capturing Transtromer¡¯s spare voice and masterful evocation of Swedish landscape in English, particularly if you don¡¯t know Swedish well. 
Robert Lowell, Robertson tells us, translated Transtromer with only a ¡°passing knowledge¡± of the language. 
Robertson himself describes a process wherein his Swedish girlfriend gives him a literal line-by-line translation into English, then reads the Swedish to him to give him ¡°the cadences,¡± after which he created ¡°relatively free¡± versions in English.
This approach to translation is not uncommon among poets (W.H. Auden gave us his versions of Icelandic sagas in much the same way). 
Nevertheless, Robertson feels the need to call on various authorities to sanction a translation process that assumes that poetry is made up of a literal semantic sense, which can easily be transmitted separately from the verse, and a tone, or music, which only a poet is sufficiently sensitive to reconstruct.
Thus:
In his introduction to Imitations (1962), Robert Lowell writes that ¡°Boris Pasternak has said that the usual reliable translator gets the literal meaning but misses the tone, and that in poetry tone is of course everything.¡±
Here the ¡°of course¡± skates over the fact that tone is always in relation to content: if the content were altered while diction and register remained the same, the tone would inevitably shift. 
One notes in passing the disparagement of the ¡°usual reliable translator¡±¨Dthe fellow knows his foreign language, but doesn¡¯t understand poetry.
T.S. Eliot is then cited as having warned Lowell not to present his ¡®imitations¡¯ of Transtromer and others as ¡°translations¡±: 
If you use the word translation in the subtitle it will attract all those meticulous little critics who delight in finding what seem to them mis-translations. 
You will remember all the fuss about Ezra Pound¡¯s Propertius.
Here collocating ¡°meticulous¡± with ¡°little¡± does the job that Lowell/ Pasternak achieved with ¡°usual reliable¡±: there are people who always interfere, but don¡¯t understand.
Robertson also calls on the British poet Jamie McKendrick who, he feels, is ¡°surely right¡± when he says ¡°The translator¡¯s knowledge of language is more important than their knowledge of languages.¡± 
How vague this remark is! 
Does it mean that the translator has one kind of knowledge of how language in general achieves its effects, and another of the nuts and bolts of the different languages he knows, the first kind being ¡°more important¡± than the second?
If that is the case, then to what degree more important? 
Wouldn¡¯t the two, rather, be interdependent and mutually sustaining?
These perplexities apart, the thrust of McKendrick¡¯s argument is clear enough: we are sweeping aside the objection that a profound knowledge of a foreign language might be required to translate its poetry, or prose for that matter, thus clearing the path for a translation by someone who is an expert in the area that counts: our own language.
I really do not wish to nitpick. 
I enjoy Lowell¡¯s and Robertson¡¯s translations of Transtromer, and Pound¡¯s Propertius. 
I am glad these people did the work they did, giving us many fine poems along the way. 
As a writer myself who has also done a number of translations I might be expected to have a vested interest in the idea that what skill I have in English sets me apart from the ¡°usual reliable¡± translator. 
However, and quite regardless of whether we want to call such work translation or imitation, it does seem that a serious issue is being dispatched with indecent haste here.
Let us remember our most intense experiences of poetry in our mother tongue, reading Eliot and Pound as adolescents perhaps, Frost and Wallace Stevens, Auden and Geoffrey Hill, then coming back to them after many years, discovering how much more was there than we had imagined, picking up echoes of other literature we have read since, seeing how the poet shifted the sense of this or that word slightly, and how this alters the tone and feeling of the whole. 
And then let¡¯s also recall some of the finest poetry criticism we have read¨Dby William Empson, Christopher Ricks, or Eliot himself¨Dthe ability of these men to fill in linguistic and literary contexts in such a way that the text takes on a deeper meaning, or to tease out relations inside a poem that had been obscure, but once mentioned are suddenly obvious and enrich our experience of the work.
Now imagine that, having a poet friend who wishes to translate these authors, you offer a literal translation of their poems in your second language. 
Maybe you read The Four Quartets out loud, line by line, to give him the cadence. 
