No Higher Honor - A Memoir of My Years in Washington 
They were an unlikely pair: the cerebral A-student from a striving black family and the son of privilege who as a candidate for president couldn¡¯t name Pakistan¡¯s military ruler.
But together they forged a vision of a muscular United States striking out on its own.
With ¡°No Higher Honor,¡± Condoleezza Rice has written an exhaustive brief to acquit herself before the bar of history, which she hopes will be more forgiving than the caustic judgments of the present.
Her power stemmed from the bond that runs through her book: the close, even adulatory relationship with George W. Bush, which prompted jealousy and derision from Donald Rumsfeld and Dick Cheney.
Rice is terse about what drew her to Bush: ¡°I liked him.
He was funny and irreverent but serious about policy.¡± 
The attraction was his moral certainty.
Intellectuals and the Foggy Bottom striped-pants crowd may have mocked his impatience with nuance, but she saw that as standing for principle.
¡°It was what I loved about George W. Bush as president,¡± she writes.
¡°What was right mattered.¡± 
Yet this very clarity and impatience set the stage for the administration¡¯s most reviled decisions, the ones she has written this book to defend.
To plot a new course for a Bush presidency even before the election, she had assembled a group that called itself the Vulcans.
They were drawn largely from colleagues in the previous Bush administration, and had witnessed the end of the cold war.
But this lens ¡ª Eurocentric, informed by her specialty in Russia and fed by the triumphalism of a sole American superpower ¡ª arguably blinded her to problems the second President Bush would have to confront, like the very different dynamics of the Arab world and the cost of imperial overstretch.
The starting point for the new administration was unilateralism, and evidence for its new course came early in the first term, when the White House rejected the Kyoto environmental protocol in a way Rice acknowledges was too highhanded and combative.
¡°Mr. President,¡± she said, ¡°this is going to color your foreign policy from the outset, and that¡¯s a problem.¡± 
And in the urgency that followed the attacks of 9/11, the conviction that the United States could not wait for slow-motion coalition-building hardened into pre-emptive action.
The book¡¯s few vivid scenes are largely of those early, fearful days: Rice looking at herself in the mirror and asking what she had missed before 9/11, or waiting to see if top officials had been exposed to deadly botulism.
¡°I was shaken to my core,¡± she writes.
The one and only time she raised her voice to Bush, she reports, is when she told him it wasn¡¯t safe to return to Washington.
This atmosphere, hard to summon now, framed the decisions on detention, ¡°enhanced interrogation¡± and the invasion of Iraq.
Still, her defense of detention and interrogation is unconvincing; she does not grapple with the violations of civil liberties or the blow to American values, clinging instead to legal technicalities and the argument that the measures saved lives.
Of the military tribunals, she maintains that she and other top national security officials weren¡¯t shown the order the president signed authorizing them.
¡°In that case I told the president that the White House counsel and the vice president¡¯s office had not served him well.¡± 
In 2006, the Supreme Court ruled the tribunals unconstitutional.
Above all, Rice wrestles with Iraq.
Stung by the charges that the administration lied about Saddam Hussein¡¯s weapons of mass destruction, she says, ¡°It is hard for many people now, knowing what subsequently occurred, to appreciate how compelling the overall intelligence case against Saddam appeared to be.¡±
She also strives to recreate the fear among Bush officials that they were underestimating a serious threat to American security.
Yet her sound bite from a Sunday talk show ¡ª ¡°We don¡¯t want the smoking gun to be a mushroom cloud¡± ¡ª now reverberates as one of the most hyperbolic claims of the Bush years.
Rice¡¯s most puzzling argument is that the administration was mistaken in releasing individual intelligence nuggets to the public, so that the case for war seemed to hang on specific assertions that were later proven wrong: the ¡°16 words¡± in the State of the Union charging that Iraq had tried to buy uranium from Niger is one example.
But if those assertions about the threat from Hussein¡¯s weapons of mass destruction were empty, what was the rationale for the war?
Many of the worst mistakes of the war, Rice insists, were made by the Pentagon: too few troops to enforce order; disbanding the Iraqi Army; surreal official briefings, at increasing odds with the reality that foreign correspondents on the ground were seeing.
(I talked daily with journalists who were risking their lives to get the story.)
Indeed, she says, by 2006 she refused to cite the blizzard of deceptive military statistics claiming success.
¡°I don¡¯t believe them myself,¡± she told her chief of staff.
Finally, her growing anguish over the course of the war culminated in a tense confrontation with Bush when she bluntly told him, ¡°It¡¯s failing.¡± 
His response was to ask her what policy she thought would work.
¡°That was my moment of deepest despair about Iraq,¡± she writes.¡°I wasn¡¯t sure that there was an answer to the president¡¯s question.¡± 
In their own books, Rumsfeld and Cheney lambaste Rice.
It¡¯s her turn now. She is more polite than they were, insisting throughout that their sharpening differences were about policy, not personality.
But she skewers Rumsfeld as an arrogant man unsettled by the ascent and access to power of a woman who was once his junior.
And she captures the swagger of Cheney by describing how he excluded her and Colin Powell from his 2003 celebration of the liberation of Iraq.
Yet her own blind spots are also apparent.
She admits, for example, that she didn¡¯t expect Iraqis to view Americans as occupiers, ignoring the history of Iraqi resistance to the British in the 1920s and the Arab sensitivity to any tinge of colonialism.
Her Eurocentrism was an obvious handicap.
And in a 766-page book that seems to include virtually every trip she ever made, she gives short shrift to the rapid deterioration in Afghanistan.
She notes that President Hamid Karzai was often unrealistic and paranoid, but mentions none of the corruption and dysfunction that alienated Afghans and strengthened the Taliban.
Similarly, she glances over the double-dealing that permitted Pakistan to receive billions in American aid while members of its security services were backing anti-American militants.
There were successes: a passionate commitment to Africa that produced programs to fight AIDS; development grants and pressure to reduce killings in Darfur; the disarming of Qaddafi (which she rightly points out deprived him of weapons of mass destruction he might have unleashed in the Arab Spring); a nuclear pact with India.
Rice also seems eager to claim credit for sowing the seeds of the Arab Spring by, among other things, helping to establish ¡°a fragile democratic pathway for Iraq¡± and encouraging democracy in Lebanon.
¡°No Higher Honor¡± really shows us two Condoleezza Rices: one, the impatient unilateralist who was national security adviser, the other the born-again diplomat who, as secretary of state, worked to repair some of the damage that had been done to American credibility by its unilateralism.
¡°People were tired of us,¡± she told the president a few months before they left office.
A humbling thought as history renders judgment.
