Hedy Lamarr¡¯s World War II Adventure 
On a sweltering Paris evening in June 1926, a 25-year-old pianist and composer from Trenton stepped out onto the stage of the Th¨¦tre des Champs-lys¨¦es, which was crowded with an array of pianos, bass drums, xylophones, electric bells and electric fans (later to be substituted by enormous airplane propellers), as well as a hand-cranked siren.
He nodded to the conductor, and the stuffy air in the hall suddenly began pulsing and throbbing, banging and wailing with a loud and persistent mechanical cacophony.
Within a few minutes, according to one eyewitness, the concert had degenerated into a shouting match: ¡°Above the mighty noise of the pianos and drums arose catcalls and booing, shrieking and whistling, shouts of ¡®thief¡¯ mixed with ¡®bravo.¡¯¡±  
The audience, which included Eliot, Pound, Joyce and Diaghilev, was in an uproar.
The young composer from Trenton was George Antheil.
At 5-foot-4, with a round, cherubic face and straight blond hair perfectly parted like a choirboy¡¯s, he resembled anything but the piece of aggressive musical brutalism that was inciting the crowd.
It was originally called ¡°Message to Mars,¡± and was intended to be music for a Dadaist film. The title had been changed to ¡°Ballet M¨¦canique,¡± perhaps better to amplify the work¡¯s emphatic embrace of Machine Age aesthetics, a kind of futuristic robo-art that Fritz Lang would evoke the following year in his film ¡°Metropolis.¡±
Antheil had arrived in Paris in 1923 via Berlin and had soon endeared himself to its Left Bank intelligentsia, moving with his future wife, a Hungarian woman named Boski, into a tiny apartment on the second floor of Sylvia Beach¡¯s Shakespeare Company bookstore and remaining there for 10 years.
He shared with his hero Stravinsky a desire to distance himself from the previous generation¡¯s plush Romanticism by posing in its place a musical ideal of severe objectivity and mechanistic precision.
¡°Ballet M¨¦canique¡± made Antheil a celebrity.
He followed it with other attention-getting projects, including a ¡°Jazz Symphony¡± and an opera, ¡°Transatlantic,¡± which when it had its premiere in Frankfurt in 1930 featured an American presidential candidate caught in a love nest and a soprano singing an aria while taking a bath.
For an American composer he was receiving a lot of attention, but he was nonetheless desperately, chronically broke.
With Europe on economic spin cycle and fascism on the rise, Antheil returned home to America, living briefly in New York, where he wrote ¡°squibs¡± for Esquire magazine, including advice for young lovers.
He also published a book, ¡°Every Man His Own Detective: A Study of Glandular Criminology.¡± 
In 1936, with a $4,000 advance from Esquire, the couple drove across the country to Hollywood, where Antheil offered himself to the movie studios.
The former avant-garde musical anarchist was ready to go to work for the Beast itself, and soon he was busily if not lucratively scoring films for Cecil B. DeMille.
At the same time Antheil was plugging away in Hollywood studios, the movie mogul Louis B. Mayer, on a visit to London, was introduced to a startlingly beautiful Vienna-born actress who, although still in her early 20s, had accomplished her own scandal by appearing nude and simulating passionate adulterous sex in a mostly silent movie called ¡°Ecstasy.¡±
The daughter of an affluent Jewish banker, Hedwig Kiesler had studied ballet and classical piano, attended an exclusive girls¡¯ school in Switzerland and had already endured several years as the trophy wife of Fritz Mandl, an immensely wealthy Austrian munitions manufacturer.
Her acting credits were slight ¡ª her jealous husband, after the wedding, had forbidden her from further movie work and had even attempted to buy up every existing copy of ¡°Ecstasy¡± ¡ª but the great stage director Max Reinhardt thought enough of her to cast her in several productions and had given her the sobriquet that would define her for the rest of her life, ¡°the most beautiful woman in the world.¡±
Hedwig Kiesler, at the time she met Mayer, had just run away from her suffocating life as Mandl¡¯s bride, fleeing with only her luggage and jewelry in search of a chance to go back to acting.
But she scrounged enough to book passage on the Normandie, the exclusive luxury liner on which Mayer and his party were returning to America.
Like many Hollywood stories, this one is encrusted with the usual legendary bons mots and self-serving anecdotes, but Mayer, who had seen ¡°Ecstasy,¡± would be quoted as saying, ¡°You¡¯re lovely, but . . . I don¡¯t like what people would think about a girl who flits bare-assed around the screen.¡± 
