At Home With Karl Marx 
¡°I first encountered the Marx family story in the back of a London magazine,¡± Mary Gabriel writes in the opening line of her intimate account of Karl Marx and his family. 
It is not a reassuring start for the reader, particularly when the publisher promises a book that uncovers ¡°the unyielding love that bound together a man and woman in the midst of history¡¯s whirlwind.¡± 
Gabriel should try to have whoever came up with that one fired.
The history of Marx the man, father, husband and journalist is dramatic enough to require no overwriting, and indeed ¡°Love and Capital¡± is a huge, often gripping book. 
It gives an entertaining and balanced portrait of Marx, Engels, their colorful milieu of exiles, freaks and revolutionaries, and the little-known Marx family, dominated by Karl¡¯s political obsession. 
It also details illicit love affairs, the deaths of children and financial struggles, all based on vast research and narrated with empathetic passion. 
At the same time, it is too long by 200 pages and often undermined by flagrantly purple throbbings, minor mistakes and portentous overegging.
In the prologue we learn that London ¡°signaled like a beacon in the black and roiling North Sea waters¡±; for us English pedants, the city stands on the Thames. 
One sentence ploddingly reads: ¡°In rooms throughout England, men of vision were similarly hard at work.¡± 
Marx is described as ¡°a man-child,¡± whose mind is ¡°as hard and brilliant as a diamond.¡± 
Emperor Napoleon III, a shrewd politician whose career may have ended in disaster but who managed to dominate France and to some extent Europe for 20 years, is said by Gabriel to have had ¡°the placid face of a dimwit.¡±
Gabriel, the author of a biography of Victoria Woodhull, argues that Marx¡¯s private life is especially relevant now, because in 2008 ¡°as I moved from research to writing, belief in the infallibility¡± of capitalism ¡°began to waver,¡± making Marx¡¯s analysis seem ¡°more prescient and compelling.¡± 
But this is surely an argument for a new work on Marxism, not on his private life. 
No one should disagree with Plutarch¡¯s view that personality matters in history, but Gabriel writes in her introduction that without the women in Marx¡¯s life, ¡°there would have been no Karl Marx, and without Karl Marx the world would not be as we know it.¡± 
Is that really true? 
Did the Dickensian facts of Marx¡¯s family life, no matter how delicious, change the world?
In fact, ¡°Love and Capital¡± is enjoyable not so much because of any brisk analysis of Marxist theory that it provides or its endless catalog of political feuding, but because of the details of family life and family politics that Gabriel offers up ¡ª her vivid portrait of a struggling, obsessional bohemian intellectual in the capitals of mid-19th-century Europe.
Gabriel¡¯s heroine is certainly Marx¡¯s wife, a beautiful aristocrat. 
As the author puts it: ¡°Jenny von Westphalen was the most desirable young woman in Trier,¡± so well connected that her brother later became Prussian interior minister even while Marx was planning the downfall of the reactionary kingdoms of Europe.
Jenny remains her own person as she copes with the mountainous selfishness and self-regard of her husband. 
When they have sex before they actually marry, she writes to him: ¡°I can feel no regret. 
When I shut my eyes very tightly, I can see your blessed smiling eyes. . . . 
Oh Karl . . . I am happy and overjoyed. . . . 
