Ben Jonson: In and Out of Shakespeare＊s Shadow 
Writing a few decades after the deaths of the two greatest writers of the Elizabethan and Jacobean era, the poet and critic John Dryden came clean about his feelings toward both.
※I admire him,§ he wrote of Ben Jonson, ※but I love Shakespeare.§ 
If in the context of literary history admiration can be said to entail sustained academic interest, and love to consist of centuries of popularity among both scholars and laymen alike, Dryden seems to have spoken for posterity.
Jonson was the more celebrated and multifariously accomplished figure during his time and in the years immediately after his death in 1637, but his plays are produced relatively rarely today 求 only ※Volpone§ and ※The Alchemist§ are widely known 求 and his poetry is read more rarely still.
Shakespeare has emerged as the great genius of the age, the author of plays that will hold the stage as long as there are stages to hold, and a cycle of sonnets that are almost equally prized.
The contrasting lives 求 and posthumous fates 求 of Jonson and Shakespeare are a minor but recurring theme in the deeply researched but happily readable new biography of Jonson by Ian Donaldson, entitled ※Ben Jonson: A Life.§
A general editor of the forthcoming seven-volume ※Cambridge Edition of the Works of Ben Jonson,§ Donaldson has a case to make that, despite the Shakespearean eclipse, Jonson was as central to the development of the British theater as Shakespeare was 求 in some ways perhaps more so, at least during the years in which their plays were first produced.
Jonson ※would do much to transform the status of the dramatic author in early modern England, boldly asserting his moral dignity, critical authority and quasi-legal rights of textual ownership,§ Donaldson writes.
※Above all, he would make the dramatic author avisible figure 求 nominally visible on the title pages of his works, imaginatively visible through the language of his own dramatic creations.§ 
Shakespeare＊s comparative invisibility during his lifetime has certainly posed intractable problems in the centuries since his death, as the eternal and tedious arguments over the authorship of his plays illustrate.
Had he the foresight to make himself the colorful and combative public figure Jonson was 求 jailed several times, famed for insobriety, sometime friend and sometime foe of the mighty names of his age 求 we would not be plagued by the rankling theories of the Oxfordians that still clamor today.
After a prologue that seems to protest a little much in insisting, contrary to general belief, that the Jonson biographer faces many of the same ※puzzles and excitements§ that challenge writers on Shakespeare, Donaldson begins his book midstride, almost literally, with Jonson marching out of London on a journey to Scotland undertaken entirely on foot.
It was 1618 and he was 46, and already a literary figure of sufficient renown that ※along the road, local dignitaries, emissaries from the great houses, young people and old turn out to welcome him.§ 
Although much work and greater fame were still ahead of him, Jonson ※had already emerged as Britain＊s first literary celebrity.§ 
The Scottish journey was also notable for Jonson＊s climactic meeting with William Drummond, whose jottings from the conversations they had have been a key resource for scholars, but in some ways a dubious and misleading one, as Donaldson convincingly argues.
It is from these sketchy notes, for instance, that the image of Jonson as perhaps the first trash talker of literary London ?emerges, in his assessment that John Donne, the great poet and Jonson＊s exact contemporary and friend, ※deserved hanging§ for ※not keeping of accent.§ More infamous: the imputation that Shakespeare ※wanted art.§ 
Certainly Jonson was better read than Shakespeare, despite sharing relatively humble beginnings.
He was of Scottish descent 求 hence the road trip 求 and his birth is a matter of some conjecture, although the year was probably 1572. (Donaldson spends too long sifting the matter of an exact date in the summer, in an ample digression on astrology.)
His father had died a month before his birth, and Jonson grew up in London as the stepson of a bricklayer, and would practice the trade himself, even after he began writing.
But his intelligence won him a place at a good school, and he was well versed in Latin, drawing on classical authors (he particularly revered Horace) as models throughout his career.
His theatrical beginnings came in early collaborations Jonson later disdained and excluded from the First Folio edition of his works, printed in 1616.
One of them, the lost play ※The Isle of Dogs,§ occasioned his first stint in the clink, for sedition.
Satire, which would become a Jonson specialty as it never was for Shakespeare, was dangerous business in Elizabethan England.
Jacobean England, too: Jonson would also write afoul of the Crown during James＊s reign, when he was again imprisoned, along with his collaborators on the play ※Eastward Ho!§ 
Donaldson notes that the surviving text gives little indication of what particularly offended the monarch, unless it was general ribbing of the Scottish knights who now peopled the court.
Kings and queens are notoriously touchy.
Despite these somewhat puzzling missteps, given his ambition and proximity to the centers of power, throughout his life Jonson made significant headway among the treacherous waters of the English court, a remarkable feat given the many strikes against him.
※He was a difficult, quarrelsome, vain, pedantically learned, hard-drinking member of the wrong faith, tainted with a criminal record,§ Donaldson writes, as well as ※a satirist of court manners§ accused of sedition.
For all that, he became one of the most sought-after authors of masques, the elaborate entertainments combining poetry, music and dancing that were commissioned by the king and queen and various deep---pocketed aristocrats for special occasions and holidays.
He was forgiven much for his talent.
Jonson married many contradictions (and a wife, of whom little is known and who plays virtually no role in this biography), and Donaldson delves into them all thoroughly.
He draws at length on recent scholarship, mostly for minor points, and is generous 求 perhaps overly so 求 in crediting other Jonson specialists. ?
(Phrases like ※Barbara Mowat has persuasively argued§ and ※Fredson Bowers has plausibly suggested§ recur with numbing frequency, even though the book includes generous endnotes.)
Because its subject is ever evolving 求 ※Jonson, like his own creation, Volpone, moved with the agility of a player from one role to the next,§ as Donaldson puts it 求 the book moves at a lively clip, despite the occasional excessive divagation into the byways of court politics and the troublesome matter of religion, which remained a volatile topic throughout Jonson＊s life.
(After converting to Catholicism during Elizabeth＊s reign 求 and being brought to court for recusancy, along with his wife 求 Jonson returned to the Anglican fold later in life; on neither occasion does political expediency appear to have played any role.)
Donaldson＊s analysis of Jonson＊s writings is necessarily condensed, given the sheer mass of words produced, but he makes incisive arguments for the great comedies of contemporary London life, and gives almost equal due to the now all-but-unknown historical dramas, ※Sejanus His Fall§ and ※Catiline His Conspiracy.§
There are also generous selections from his poetry 求 much of it written to praise patrons 求 and descriptions of the masques on which he collaborated (and quarreled) with the architect and designer Inigo Jones.
Jonson＊s writing contains a measure of quotable lines 求 ※Drink to me only with thine eyes§ is his 求 but because his sharpest gift was for savage satire, his plays lack the universal appeal of even Shakespeare＊s slightest comedies.
(T. S. Eliot, an admirer of Jonson＊s, wrote that his was ※an art of caricature,§ albeit ※of great caricature, like Marlowe＊s.§)
His writings for the theater, Jonson once grumbled, gained him less than ?200 in the course of his life.
He was often reduced to penury, and the humiliation of calling on his muses to plea for money in verse.
But while it was not a lucrative pursuit, he believed ardently in the importance of publishing his work, and was also instrumental in helping to usher Shakespeare＊s First Folio into being.
His verses of praise published in the Folio end with a celebrated encomium: ※He was not of an age, but for all time!§ 
History has borne out the truth of this exclamation, obviously, but there is a brittle irony in the subsequent decline in repute of its author.
Jonson sought assiduously to play a great role on the public stage of his time, as a playwright, poet and general figure of literary renown, and he hoped that posterity would bring even greater glory.
But by the 18th century it was Shakespeare whose imaginative works captivated the English-speaking world.
As Donaldson wryly says, ※Fame, whose uncertainty Jonson had always recognized, had proved to be an erratic friend.§ 
