Is that a fish in your ear?¡ª¡ªtranslation and the meaning of everything 
The theory of translation is very rarely ¡ª how to put this? ¡ª comical. 
Its mode is elegy, and severe admonishment. 
In the 20th century, its great figures were Vladimir Nabokov, in exile from Soviet Russia, attacking libertines like Robert Lowell for their infidelities to the literal sense; or Walter Benjamin, Jewish in a proto-Nazi Berlin, describing the Task of the Translator as an impossible ideal of exegesis. 
You can never, so runs the elegiac argument, precisely reproduce a line of poetry in another language. 
Poetry! You can hardly even translate ¡°maman.¡± . . . 
And this elegiac argument has its elegiac myth: the Tower of Babel, where the world¡¯s multiplicity of languages is seen as mankind¡¯s punishment ¡ª condemned to the howlers, the faux amis, the foreign menu apps. 
Whereas the ideal linguistic state would be the lost universal language of Eden.
It¡¯s rarely flippant, or joyful ¡ª the theory of translation.
David Bellos¡¯s new book on translation at first sidesteps this philosophy. 
He describes the dragomans of Ottoman Turkey, the invention of simultaneous translation at the Nuremberg trials, news wires, the speech bubbles of Ast¨¦rix, Bergman subtitles. . . . 
He offers an anthropology of translation acts. 
But through this anthropology a much grander project emerges. 
The old theories were elegiac, stately; they were very much severe. 
Bellos is practical, and sprightly. 
He is unseduced by elegy. And this is because he is on to something new.
Bellos is a professor of French and comparative literature at Princeton University, and also the director of the Program in Translation and Intercultural Communication there (at which, I should add, I once spoke). 
But to me he¡¯s more interesting as the translator of two peculiarly great and problematic novelists: the Frenchman Georges Perec, whose work is characterized by a manic concern for form, and the Albanian Ismail Kadare, whose work Bellos translates not from the original Albanian, but from French translations supervised by Kadare. 
Bellos¡¯s twin experience with these novelists is, I think, at the root of his new book, for these experiences with translation prove two things: It¡¯s still possible to find adequate equivalents for even manically formal prose; and it¡¯s also possible to find such equivalents via a language that is not a work¡¯s original. 
Whereas according to the sad and orthodox theories of translation, neither of these truths should be true.
At one point, Bellos quotes with rightful pride a small instance of his own inventiveness. In Perec¡¯s novel ¡°Life: A User¡¯s Manual,¡± a character walks through a Parisian arcade, stopping to look at the ¡°humorous visiting cards in a joke-shop window.¡± 
In Perec¡¯s original French, one of these cards is: ¡°Adolf Hitler/Fourreur.¡± 
A fourreur is a furrier, but Perec¡¯s joke-shop joke is that it also resembles the French pronunciation of F¨¹hrer. 
So Bellos, in his English version, rightly translates ¡°fourreur¡± not as ¡°furrier,¡± but like this: ¡°Adolf Hitler/German Lieder.¡± 
Bellos¡¯s new multiphonic pun is a travesty, no doubt about it ¡ª and it¡¯s also the most precise translation possible.
