The articles of 21st-century faith 
Last week I argued that there is an ambiguity in the notion of "true religion", which could refer to what we think religion ought to be, in its best form, and what it actually, usually is. 
For now, I want to park the second, empirical question and focus on the first, prescriptive one.
Atheist critics of religion are often dismissed for dealing only with the simple, highly literal forms of belief, while ignoring more nuanced, intellectual understandings of religion. 
The form of this argument varies, but in general terms it rests on a rejection of the idea that religion requires belief in anthropomorphic supernatural beings. 
As Theo Hobson put it in an exchange with me a few years back, "a huge proportion of believers inhabit this grey area between 'literal' and 'metaphorical' belief - in a sense all believers do. 
Atheists call this muddle and hypocrisy - they want every believer to be two-dimensional, so as to bash them all with a two-dimensional critique."
I have a great deal of sympathy for the view that it is possible to have religion without primitive superstition. 
However, there seems to me to be an intriguing ambiguity in this argument. 
Is it the case that religion need not or should not include literal, supernatural beliefs?
 "Should" not implies an acceptance that atheist critics are actually right to say that belief in gods, heaven and such like is silly, but wrong to think that intelligent religious people actually embrace such absurdities. 
All that "need not" means is that it is possible to do away with the supernatural if you so wish. But that is compatible with the view that not only are supernatural beliefs an acceptable part of religion, they may, as a matter of fact, remain central for most believers.
I can't help suspecting that many people who stress the non-supernatural aspects of religion are actually still very much wedded to the spooky bits, but too embarrassed to volunteer the fact. 
For instance, I've had many an interesting discussion with a believer about how religious language is not the same as scientific language, only to discover that, when pushed, the faith of my otherwise modern, intelligent and sophisticated interlocutor rests on a belief in Christ's empty tomb.
So I want to see just how many people really do embrace the kind of religious faith that explicitly rejects the kinds of things atheist critics think silly. 
To do this I've formulated four "articles of 21st-century faith": beliefs that I think would make religion entirely intellectually respectable, even to the hardest-nosed atheists. 
They are neither so vague that anyone could put their name to them, nor so specific that people who are broadly sympathetic should feel unable to do so. 
They are brief and minimalist, stating clearly and concisely only as much as needs to be stated to establish the legitimacy of superstition-free belief. 
Here they are:
Preamble. 
We acknowledge that religion comes in many shapes and forms and that therefore any attempt to define what religion "really" is would be stipulation, not description. 
Nevertheless, we have a view of what religion should be, in its best form, and these four articles describe features that a religion fit for the contemporary world needs to have. 
These features are not meant to be exhaustive and nor do they necessarily capture what is most important for any given individual. 
They are rather a minimal set of features that we can agree on despite our differences, and believe others can agree on too.
To be religious is primarily to assent to a set of values, and/or practise a way of life, and/or belong to a community that shares these values and/or practices. 
Any creeds or factual assertions associated with these things, especially ones that make claims about the nature and origin of the natural universe, are at most secondary and often irrelevant.
Religious belief does not, and should not, require the belief that any supernatural events have occurred here on Earth, including miracles that bend or break natural laws, the resurrection of the dead, or visits by gods or angelic messengers.
Religions are not crypto- or proto-sciences. 
They should make no claims about the physical nature, origin or structure of the natural universe. 
That which science can study and explain empirically should be left to science, and if a religion makes a claim that is incompatible with our best science, the scientific claim, not the religious one, should prevail.
Religious texts are the creation of the human intellect and imagination. 
None need be taken as expressing the thoughts of a divine or supernatural mind that exists independently of humanity.
I have already sent these to a handful of selected atheists, agnostics and liberal believers for their comments. 
I'll discuss the initial responses and what they tell us next week. 
Over coming weeks I intend to find out how many others can go along with them. 
This will tell us something about how religion really is, as well as how it ought to be. 
If it really is the case that lots of mainstream religious leaders and believers can happily sign up to this, then religion really is the much more benign, unsuperstitious thing that liberals and agnostics have said it is all along. 
If not, then I hope these voices will concede that theirs is a vision for how religion should be, not as it is, and join in the criticisms of the religions that actually surround us today.
As I have suggested in recent weeks, I am sure that many will simply refuse to state clearly whether they agree or not. 
They will complain, for example, that the wording forces them to choose between two equally unpalatable alternatives. 
But this is to deny a simply logical truth that if you do not agree with a statement, you disagree with it. 
For instance, if you cannot say you agree that "Religious belief does not, and should not, require the belief that any supernatural events have occurred here on Earth", then it follows that you think religion does require the belief that some supernatural events have occurred here on Earth. 
Either it requires such beliefs or it does not. 
Yes, there is much more that would have to be said about just what is meant by "supernatural" and so on to work out from this precisely what a person who agrees or disagrees thinks. 
But that they agree or disagree should be clear.
So let us be plain that to reject these articles of faith would mean to maintain their contradictions, namely:
Religious creeds or factual assertions are neither secondary nor irrelevant to religion.
Religious belief requires the belief that any supernatural events have occurred here on Earth.
Religions can make claims about the physical nature, origin or structure of the natural universe. 
That which science can study and explain empirically should not be left to science, and if a religion makes a claim that is incompatible with our best science, the scientific claim need not prevail.
Human intellect and imagination are insufficient to explain the existence of religious texts.
So as you can see, the stakes are high. 
Rejecting the articles of 21st-century faith means admitting many of the things that are claimed of religion by "crude and simplistic" new atheist critics. 
And since I myself have often been critical of this camp, I actually have more to lose than most, should hardly any religious folk be able to sign up to these articles, or explain clearly why they won't in such a way that doesn't leave them either lost in a fog of obfuscation or hanging on to outmoded doctrines. 
I have done a lot of defending of intelligent people of faith over the years. Are they going to let me down?
