The Mystery Babylon Religion 
As we've already noted, the religion created in Babylon by Nimrod and Semiramis is known as the Mystery Religion or simply The Mysteries. At its core, it was an inverted re-telling of the fall of man in Genesis.
In the Biblical account of the incident, the serpent caused Adam and Eve to sin against God by suggesting they eat the fruit from the tree of knowledge. Because they acted in disobedience to God who had specifically told them not to eat from that tree, sin entered into the human race and all the misery, disease and tragedy that makes up human history stems from that moment.
In the Babylonian inversion of this event however, the serpent is portrayed as the real good god. He was worshipped for opening the eyes of men and for infusing the woman with his passion and lust. 
He was seen as a liberator and an enlightener. To them, he illuminated the minds of mankind by revealing to them the secret knowledge that God had tried to keep from them. 
The secret serpent knowledge that could provide mankind with their own salvation and which would see them become gods. 
That is why the religion is called the Mysteries - Because it claims to harbour this secret knowledge that was offered to Adam and Even in the Garden of Eden. 
In the Mysteries, the true God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Yahweh, was portrayed as a wrathful Deity of hate, who was guilty of opposing freedom of choice.
ASTROLOGY & HOROSCOPES
Because Nimrod and Semiramis set themselves up as the sun and moon gods, the religion also made use of a corruption of primeval astronomy. 
It was believed by Noah's righteous ancestors that the stars told the story of Satan's rebellion against God in heaven, his fall, subversion of mankind, the promise of a Messiah who would suffer and die to lift the curse of sin and then be installed as Lord of creation and conqueror of Satan. 
These stories were widely known amongst the people of the time.
Semiramis however, again inverted the story and so in the Mysteries the stars of the sky told a different story. In the Babylonian version, Satan was depicted as the rightful lord of the universe, whose throne has only been temporarily usurped by God. 
One day an anti-Christ, a seed of the serpent, would be born of a divine mother, would become god himself, replace God and return rulership of the world to the serpent. 
Semiramis claimed that this was the real hidden truth concealed within the stories. 
This corrupt and satanic version is the origin of astrology, which still exists virtually unchanged today.
The Babylonians didn't just believe the stars told the story of the universe. They believed you could divine the future of individuals through them as well. 
If the stars told the stories of things that had passed they could also tell the stories of things to come. 
They would therefore divide the sky into sections and give meanings to each section on the basis of the stars that are found there. 
According to the theory, a person's destiny is said to be determined by whatever section or "sign" he is born under. 
This is the origin of horoscopes.
In times to come, astrology would pass to the empire of ancient Egypt, which is the location we most associate with pyramids today. 
The 'sacred mountain' pyramids were constructed with certain mathematical relationships to the stars.
By the time Moses led the Jews out of Egypt in Exodus, astrology had also infected the population in Canaan which was the land that they were headed towards. 
Hence, some of the strictest warnings in the Bible against astrology date from this period (Lev. 19:31; Deut. 18).
The Biblical denunciations of astrology identify the practice with demonism or Satanism in the sense that Satan and his hosts were actually being worshiped in the guise of the signs, planets and stars. And as mentioned previously, the leading lights of the sky - sun and moon - were worshipped in the form of Nimrod and Semiramis.
Very significantly, a third leading light was identified in the sky that was 23 times more luminous than the sun and therefore was considered to be the most important star in the sky. It is known as the "dog star", "Sirius", or "The morning star" because it is still visible even in the morning light. 
Remember in Isaiah 14:12 Lucifer is referred to as the morning star. 
When allied with the sun and moon, the dog star completes an unholy trinity of lights personified in Satan, Nimrod and Semiramis.
HIERARCHY
One of the key elements of the Mysteries that I also want to emphasise is the hierarchical structure that they contained. 
The secret illuminating knowledge from the serpent was not to be freely distributed to the unworthy. You would have to become initiated into the religion and then work your way through ascending degrees of revelation and knowledge. This ascension through the levels was considered to be a journey from the darkness of ignorance to the light of knowledge. 
Progression was propagated by a hierarchy of priests and priestesses and were marked by fearful rites of passage and oaths of secrecy, which, if broken, would lead to death. 
Similar oaths of secrecy are sworn today by other hierarchical institutions like the freemasons and Jesuits. 
More about them later.
The further along in the process you were, the more enlightened you were considered. The more enlightened you were, the more you could look down your nose at the unenlightened. 
The hierarchical structure of the Mysteries was designed to create inequality amongst men based on what they knew. It can itself can be best visualised in the form of a pyramid or ziggurat again. Wide at the base and increasingly narrow as you rise through the levels towards the peak.
The idea is that there is an average mass of people at the bottom of the pyramid who are ignorant blind fools with an increasingly small number of enlightened people towards the top. The very top, the capstone as it were, is Lucifer himself, the giver of the light. 
If you've read or seen Harry Potter you'll be vaguely familiar with this concept. 
In those stories, the name 'muggle' is given to the majority of people in the world who go about their lives utterly oblivious to the wizarding world that is actually all around them or at least very close at hand. We are encouraged to think of muggles as idiots and indeed the Oxford English Dictionary has even picked up on the word and defines it as "an individual who is clumsy or unable to acquire a new skill.
" Those who were born into a muggle family but have been awakened to wizardry are called 'mudbloods' i.e. half bloods, and this places you on a higher position than a muggle but a lower position to those who have centuries of pure wizardry in their ancestry.
JK Rowling here, as in many aspects of her books is actually giving insights into real occultism. 
The word "occult" means "hidden" or "concealed" and it is the modern name by which the ideas of the Mysteries have come to be known today. 
When you have people involved in the occult today, the information, knowledge and power they are trying to tap into, is the exact same as that serpent knowledge which originated in Babylon.
The idea of occultism retains the concept that there are a powerful, enlightened or illuminated few at the top who see things as they really are and the rest are kept in the dark. Mere ignorant fools. The enlightened few consider the average mass of people to be almost sub-human. Like cattle, who deserve to be led like cattle and treated like cattle.
This knowledge hierarchy is replicated in almost all occult societies today, like freemasonry for example, and it fulfils an important function of allowing Satan to pervert by small degrees. 
Those at the lower levels of freemasonry have no idea of what they are actually involved in. It is only as they slowly rise through the degrees that they have the true information revealed to them. 
By perverting in small stages and in the passing of time, people lose sight of just how far they're straying and can be led to accept things that they would have otherwise flatly rejected if they had been given the full revelation from the start. 
Just a little change here, a little change there ?it's not so much. 
And yet with enough small changes and with enough time, a person or society can be completely transformed without even realising it. 
This is one of the reasons why we must have a zero tolerance policy with sin. The concessions we make today will form a link in a chain of concessions in future if we're not careful.
This kind of system that needs to keep knowledge concealed from the masses, by its very nature, necessitates the use of symbolism, gestures, monuments, secret words and signs to ensure that those in the dark are kept in the dark. That's why the occult makes heavy use of these devices. They use symbols that are packed with meaning for the initiated by which mean absolutely nothing to the average man. By using symbols, information can be communicated by being 'hidden in plain sight'. That is, they are in the open air for all to see, but they are not recognised or interpreted by the average person.
It is also for this reason that the occult always hides behind outward facades of neutrality, goodness or even holiness. I mentioned this earlier but don't expect evil to have an obvious outward appearance of evil. 
That's not how Satan wins people to himself. More often than not he disguises himself as an angel of light to seduce, which is why discernment becomes one of our most important tools in the last days.
It is also for this same reason that dual meanings are prevalent in the occult world. Wherever there is a dark infernal truth to be communicated, there is almost always a false, but light and seemingly good cover story. The public are given the false cover story in order to keep the dark truth concealed. 
The initiated and the enlightened only are aware of the true meanings. By using this system of double-speak and deception, occultists can speak a sentence containing words which mean something to fellow occultists, but which mean something very different to the average person. 
Bernie Taupin, Elton John's lyricist, is reported to have once said that he never wrote a single song that wasn't written in this double speak. The average listener hears Elton John's lyrics and either doesn't discern a message at all or thinks they discern a light and wholesome one, while in reality, they are telling quite a different message to the initiated.
Closely related to this concept is the idea that light and darkness emanate from the same source. 
Nimrod and Semiramis were the sun and the moon, the leading lights of the day and the night, but they were two separate manifestations of the same source - Satan. 
So the idea is that there is one force which has a light masculine side and a dark feminine side. 
If you've seen Star Wars you'll be familiar with this concept. The Force is considered neutral but can be used for good or evil. 
Or what about the Wizard of Oz where it explains there can be good witches or bad witches. 
This is key to occultism. The power is neutral, it's how you use it that counts. 
And speaking of songs with double meanings, Bernie Taupin also of course wrote the lyrics to a Wizard of Oz related song, Goodbye Yellow Brick road. 
The Wizard of Oz has an occult message that we'll get to later. 
But these are themes that have infiltrated our culture and these are some key tell-tale signs of satanic mystery religion. Look out for them as we continue our journey.
