The Little-Known Legend of Jesus in Japan 
On the flat top of a steep hill in a distant corner of northern Japan lies the tomb of an itinerant shepherd who, two millennia ago, settled down there to grow garlic. 
He fell in love with a farmer's daughter named Miyuko, fathered three kids and died at the ripe old age of 106. 
In the mountain hamlet of Shingo, he's remembered by the name Daitenku Taro Jurai. 
The rest of the world knows him as Jesus Christ.
It turns out that Jesus of Nazareth--the Messiah, worker of miracles and spiritual figurehead for one of the world's foremost religions--did not die on the cross at Calvary, as widely reported. 
According to amusing local folklore, that was his kid brother, Isukiri, whose severed ear was interred in an adjacent burial mound in Japan.
A bucolic backwater with only one Christian resident (Toshiko Sato, who was 77 when I visited last spring) and no church within 30 miles, Shingo nevertheless bills itself as Kirisuto no Sato (Christ's Hometown). 
Every year 20,000 or so pilgrims and pagans visit the site, which is maintained by a nearby yogurt factory. Some visitors shell out the 100-yen entrance fee at the Legend of Christ Museum, a trove of religious relics that sells everything from Jesus coasters to coffee mugs. 
Some participate in the springtime Christ Festival, a mashup of multidenominational rites in which kimono-clad women dance around the twin graves and chant a three-line litany in an unknown language. 
The ceremony, designed to console the spirit of Jesus, has been staged by the local tourism bureau since 1964.
The Japanese are mostly Buddhist or Shintoist, and, in a nation of 127.8 million, about 1 percent identify themselves as Christian. 
The country harbors a large floating population of folk religionists enchanted by the mysterious, the uncanny and the counterintuitive. 
"They find spiritual fulfillment in being eclectic," says Richard Fox Young, a professor of religious history at the Princeton Theological Seminary. "That is, you can have it all: A feeling of closeness--to Jesus and Buddha and many, many other divine figures--without any of the obligations that come from a more singular religious orientation."
In Shingo, the Greatest Story Ever Told is retold like this: Jesus first came to Japan at the age of 21 to study theology. 
This was during his so-called "lost years," a 12-year gap unaccounted for in the New Testament. 
He landed at the west coast port of Amanohashidate, a spit of land that juts across Miyazu Bay, and became a disciple of a great master near Mount Fuji, learning the Japanese language and Eastern culture. 
At 33, he returned to Judea--by way of Morocco!
--to talk up what a museum brochure calls the "sacred land" he had just visited.