Evangelism among Muslims 3 
In his recent book, Evangelism Today, Dr. Zwemer has stated, "The message is of far more importance than the method."While granting this in full measure, we should, at the same time,be careful to adapt our methods in order to take full advantage of every new opportunity. 
The message of evangelism remains the same.God does not change, and Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, todayand forever. 
The Cross of Christ and His resurrection remain the focal points of our message for all time, since they are great,changeless facts by which the Creator entered the stream of human history to pay the penalty of sin and redeem man unto Himself.
Methods of presenting Christian truth not only change with time and circumstance, but we feel that there is a call in the new day ahead for the abandonment of the whole attitude which gave toChristian-Muslim relations the title, "The Great MuslimControversy."
Two points developed by a study committee in their recent historical review of Muslim and Christian relations were: first,that from the very beginning the relations of Christians [and Muslims] had been largely on other planes than the religious.
They had met in political and military conflict and incommercial and other forms of rivalry, but seldom had their relations in the sphere of religion been on any large scale.
Second, from the first, there had been misunderstanding on both sides, and each religion had been misrepresented by the intellectual and ecclesiastical leaders of the other Faith. 
If this is the case, then we must seek a deeper and truer understanding of Islam by Christians who would bring to its adherents the one thing it does not have - the Christ of the Bible,the crucified, risen and living Lord of life.
In a previous chapter we have proposed that evangelists seek to become experts in avoiding controversy, and, in fact, frankly refusing to engage in polemic discussion but rather presentingChrist positively as Saviour and Lord, go on to teach the Bible to those who are willing to hear the Word. 
Though this point of view has been set forth in that Chapter, we venture to mention it here again for the sake of emphasis. 
When it is necessary to give an answer, we should always do so, in so far as is possible, in the words of Scripture, not by any statement of our own.
We recall that a veteran missionary to Muslims said, "Our explanation of the inexplicable is often wasted, but His Word does not return unto Him void." 
In addition, we may repeat that we should endeavor to follow the method of Christ, who rather than enter into needless controversy seemed to strike directly to the heart and conscience and life situation of the individual, as for instance, in the cases of Nicodemus (John 3) and the woman of Samaria (John 4) .
There were responses to this proposal of method from many parts of the world, and word came from Java that they were training their evangelists along these lines, namely: 
Avoid argument.
Where possible always answer from the Bible.
Study and follow the method of Christ.
In the recent continental theology of Europe there has been something of a division between Karl Barth and Emil Brunner concerning the point of contact in the communication of Christian truth. 
Barth has held that we should start with the Word of God and apply its truth to the needs of men. On the other hand, Brunner has felt that we should rather start with the needs of men and lead from the human situation to the answer of God in His Word.
It would seem that each point of view might suggest something useful in work with Muslims.
Jesus Christ and the prophets of the Bible certainly met the needs of men by taking the human situation and bringing the light of God to play on it. 
With the passing of former religious sanctions there is great danger of a spiritual vacuum in the Muslim world, and we shall have to meet men in their condition and turn on the light of divine truth to dissipate the darkness of their spiritual void. 
On the other hand, the Word is fundamental. 
As we have pointed out, the majority of converts from Islam testify that they were first attracted to Christianity by hearing or reading the Scripture, and in a great number of cases the Bible has been directly responsible for their conversion. 
This should add another point to our basic method. Increase in every possibleway the circulation of the Scriptures.
In this regard, let us resolve to make use of the radio,phonograph, and visual aids to spread the message of the Bible. Even very small things may be blessed by the Spirit to great results. 
One missionary suggests that much may be accomplished by memorizing a short story of Christ in the very finest prose and telling it to people whenever the occasion offers. 
Another suggests that if a verse of Scripture is committed to memory in morning devotions there will usually arise a great many times during the day when it may be used in evangelistic contacts. 
In our church in Tabriz there are several blind boys who have become Christians. 
They have copied many entire books of the Bible in Persian Braille. 
What an object lesson it is when they read the portion of Scripture we are to study!
As their fingers move over the characters and their lips speak the words of the text, other young Muslims present know that though their eyes are blind, Christ has illuminated their hearts and lives. 
Speaking of the Bible Society colporteurs [tract sellers],Bishop Thompson of Iran writes, "These men are the most important evangelistic agency at work in the villages of Iran at present. 
As they tour the country selling the Scriptures, their splendid Christian characters and the conversations they have with people result in contacts which have led to the conversion of many individuals and the inquiry of many more." 
We must not take it for granted that the agents of the Bible Society alone are responsible for the distribution of Scripture. 
This is so important a duty inMuslim lands that all missionaries, national Christian workers, and other members of the church should dedicate themselves to this great task of distribution.
Again, as we have mentioned in an earlier Chapter, next inimportance to the Bible as an agent of evangelism comes otherChristian literature. 
When a Muslim friend insists on argument concerning a certain subject it is far better to give him a book which treats the matter than to engage in controversy. 
In fact, the importance of the evangelistic function in Christian literature can hardly be overemphasized. 
The great value of the printed page has been realized for many years by workers in Muslim lands. 
The Christian Literature Committee for Muslims under MissConstance Padwick has long kept this subject before leaders in all the countries. 
A truly great Christian literature has been developed in the main languages of the Muslim world, which ranges all the way from single-page tracts to books like a Bible dictionary of a thousand pages. 
We shall need renewed zeal in both publication and distribution for the new era which lies before us.
The plowing of the Muslim lands by the machines of war have brought forth many startling changes in outlook, and Christian literature should assume a more prominent role than ever before in evangelism and the strengthening of the Church.
Another important and closely related function is the evangelistic relation to literacy programs. 
Now that we have had Dr. Frank Laubach in the Islamic world for a considerable time preparing charts in the languages that Muslims use and instituting campaigns for literacy, we hope that Christian forces may be in the fore front of this great enterprise, as, indeed, they are. 
There is no more wonderful opportunity to present Christ than in the relation of a teacher with a pupil who has been taught to read and has thereby entered a new mental world. It is quite natural that the same instructor should also open a new world of the spirit for the newly literate.
Missionary aviation is coming into prominence, and a number of young men who were pilots during the war [WWII] are now engaged intraining others to fly for the Gospel. 
No part of the world is moreadaptable to flying than the Bible lands. 
Great aviation centers have already been developed in the Islamic countries, and theGospel should not leave the rapid transportation to commercial,political, and military representatives alone. 
With so much of desert and waste land separating the centers of population, air travel is the ideal form of transport in the missionary work of the future. 
If we do not heed the signs of the times, in a few years we shall be as outmoded as one who would today cross from Damascus toBaghdad by camel caravan instead of by car. 
The new fast means of transportation should be God's gift to a new interpretation of evangelism. 
The Missionary Adventure  
One evangelist who had labored for many years with Muslims said that in this work it is always necessary to use great tact, but it is often necessary to go beyond what is safe. For a Muslim to accept Christ is certainly a great adventure of faith, and we must be willing to adventure, too, as Christian evangelists. 
When Dr. William McE. Miller held his first series of open evangelistic meetings in Teheran most people thought there would be trouble. 
He did not utter a single word against Islam or refer to it, but preached a positive Christian Gospel. 
The meetings were very well attended and aroused no untoward incident. 
Similar meetings have since been held in many cities of Iran. 
In some instances admission by tickets to such a "conference" has increased attendance and interest.
It still remains true, however, that far more fish are caught with a single hook and line in the Muslim world than by throwing the Gospel net and enclosing a multitude. 
Personal evangelism rather than public preaching is the method which produces results.
The prayerful reaching of men in personal interviews is the best of all methods to win souls. 
The purpose of the interview is to produce a sacramental moment in which the human soul meets God as revealed in Christ. 
This may happen anywhere, but a private office beside a general evangelistic or reading room is one of the most fruitful modes of meeting men where the altar fire ofChristian love may be lighted from heart to heart.
Although evangelism is the duty of each missionary and full-timeChristian worker there can be no great forward movement until laymen are brought to participate in this sacred service. 
Truly,Islam has a great lesson to teach us in this regard, for that religion was spread in regions like the East Indies and centralAfrica largely by followers of the Arabian prophet, who went therein pursuit of commerce. 
When Christians in Muslim lands show a similar zeal for the propagation of their faith and the declaration of the Gospel we shall see a new day in the winning of Muslims to faith in Christ. 
Be it said that there are at present some who are very active in this regard. 
One Christian who constructed a new house in Teheran built a special room for personal evangelism. 
Friends came to listen to the radio and remained to hear the voice of Christ! This is an example not only of lay evangelism but also of the spreading of the Gospel through the Christian home, which should bear much fruit when widely practiced. 
The new social position of women in many Muslim lands has focused attention on the home. 
In public address and in the Press the home that is described is not at all the typical Muslim household, but a Christian home where there is one wife and mother of the family. 