Fundamentals of Buddhism: Karma 
Today we have come to a couple of related ideas which are common in Buddhism and they are the ideas of karma and rebirth. 
These ideas are closely inter-related, but because the subject is a fairly wide one, we will begin to deal with the idea of karma today and rebirth in the following lecture.
We know that what binds us in samsara are the defilements - desire, ill-will and ignorance. 
We spoke about this when we talked about the Second Noble Truth - the truth of the cause of suffering. 
These defilements are something which every living being in samsara shares, whether we speak of human beings or animals or beings who live in the other realms which we do not normally perceive. 
In this, all living beings are alike and yet amongst all the living beings that we can normally perceive, there are many differences. 
For instance, some of us are wealthy, some are less wealthy, some are strong and healthy, others are disabled and so forth. 
There are many differences amongst living beings and even more so there are differences between animals and human beings. 
These differences are due to karma.
What we all share - desire, ill-will and ignorance - are common to all living beings, but the particular condition in which we find ourselves is the result of our particular karma that conditions the situation in which we find ourselves, the situation in which we may be wealthy, strong and so forth. 
These circumstances are decided by karma. 
It is in this sense that karma explains the differences amongst living beings. It explains why some beings are fortunate while others are less fortunate, some are happy while others are less happy. 
The Buddha has specifically stated that karma explains the differences between living beings. 
You might also recall that the understanding of how karma affects the birth of living beings in happy or unhappy circumstances - the knowledge of how living beings move from happy circumstances to unhappy circumstances, and vice versa, from unhappy to happy circumstances as a result of their karma - was part of the Buddha's experience on the night of His enlightenment. 
It is karma that explains the circumstances that living beings find themselves in.
Having said this much about the function of karma, let us look more closely at what karma is. 
Let us define karma. 
Maybe we can define karma best by first deciding what karma is not. 
It is quite often the case that we find people misunderstanding the idea of karma. 
This is particularly true in our daily casual use of the term. 
We find people saying that one cannot change one's situation because of one's karma. 
In this sense, karma becomes a sort of escape. 
It becomes similar to predestination or fatalism. 
This is emphatically not the correct understanding of karma. 
It is possible that this misunderstanding of karma has come about because of the popular idea that we have about luck and fate. 
It may be for this reason that our idea of karma has become overlaid in popular thought with the notion of predestination. 
Karma is not fate or predestination.
If karma is not fate or predestination, then what is it? 
Let us look at the term itself. Karma means action, means "to do". 
Immediately we have an indication that the real meaning of karma is not fate because karma is action. It is dynamic. 
But it is more than simply action because it is not mechanical action. 
It is not unconscious or involuntary action. 
It is intentional, conscious, deliberate, wilful action. 
How is it that this intentional, wilful action conditions or determines our situation? 
It is because every action must have a reaction, an effect. 
This truth has been expressed in regard to the physical universe by the great physicist Newton who formulated the law which states that every action must have an equal and opposite reaction. 
In the moral sphere of conscious actions, we have a counterpart to the physical law of action and reaction, the law that every intentional, wilful action must have its effect. 
This is why we sometimes speak either of Karma-Vipaka, intentional action and its ripened effect, or we speak of Karma-Phala, intentional action and its fruit. 
It is when we speak of intentional action together with its effect or fruit that we speak of the Law of Karma.
Let us take an example. If we plant a mango seed, the plant that springs up will be a mango tree, and eventually it will bear a mango fruit. 
Alternatively, if we plant a Pong Pong seed, the tree that will spring up will be a Pong Pong tree and the fruit a Pong Pong. 
As one sows, so shall one reap. According to one's action, so shall be the fruit. 
Similarly, in the Law of Karma, if we do a wholesome action, eventually we will get a wholesome fruit, and if we do an unwholesome action eventually we will get an unwholesome, painful result. 
This is what we mean when we say that causes bring about effects that are similar to the causes. 
This we will see very clearly when we come to specific examples of wholesome and unwholesome actions.
We can understand by means of this general introduction that karma can be of two varieties - wholesome karma or good karma and unwholesome karma or bad karma. 
In order that we should not misunderstand this description of karma, it is useful for us to look at the original term. 
In this case, it is kushala or akushala karma, karma that is wholesome or unwholesome. 
In order that we understand how these terms are being used, it is important that we know the real meaning of kushala and akushala. 
Kushala means intelligent or skilful, whereas akushala means not intelligent, not skilful. 
This helps us to understand how these terms are being used, not in terms of good and evil but in terms of skilful and unskilful, in terms of intelligent and unintelligent, in terms of wholesome and unwholesome. 
Now how wholesome and how unwholesome? 
Wholesome in the sense that those actions which are beneficial to oneself and others, those actions that spring not out of desire, ill-will and ignorance, but out of renunciation, loving-kindness and compassion, and wisdom.
One may ask how does one know whether an action that is wholesome or unwholesome will produce happiness or unhappiness. 
The answer is time will tell. 
The Buddha Himself answered the question. 
He has explained that so long as an unwholesome action does not bear its fruit of suffering, for so long a foolish person will consider that action good. 
But when that unwholesome action bears its fruit of suffering then he will realize that the action is unwholesome. Similarly, so long as a wholesome action does not bear its fruit of happiness, a good person may consider that action unwholesome. When it bears its fruit of happiness, then he will realize that the action is good. 
So one needs to judge wholesome and unwholesome action from the point of view of long-term effect. 
Very simply, whole-some actions result in eventual happiness for oneself and others, while unwholesome actions have the opposite result, they result in suffering for oneself and others.
Specifically, the unwholesome actions which are to be avoided relate to the three doors or means of action, and these are body, speech and mind. 
There are three unwholesome actions of the body, four of speech and three of mind that are to be avoided. 
The three unwholesome actions of body that are to be avoided are killing, stealing and sexual misconduct. 
The four unwholesome actions of speech that are to be avoided are lying, slander, harsh speech and malicious gossip. 
Here too we can see how the effect is similar to the cause. 
Killing shortens the life of others, deprives others of their loved ones and so forth, and so if we kill we will be liable to experience these effects. 
Similarly, stealing which is borne of the defilement of desire may lead to rebirth as a hungry ghost where one is totally destitute of desired objects. 
If it does not result in rebirth as a ghost, it will result in poverty, dependence upon others for one's livelihood and so forth. 
Sexual misconduct results in martial distress or unhappy marriages.
While unwholesome actions produce unwholesome results - suffering, wholesome actions produce wholesome results - happiness. 
One can interpret wholesome actions in two ways. 
One can simply regard wholesome actions as avoiding the unwholesome actions, avoiding killing, stealing, sexual misconduct and the rest. 
Or one can speak of wholesome actions in positive terms. Here one can refer to the list of whole-some actions that includes generosity, good conduct, meditation, reverence, service, transference of merits, rejoicing in the merit of others, hearing the Dharma, teaching the Dharma and straightening of one's own views. 
Just as unwholesome actions produce suffering, these wholesome actions produce benefits. 
Again effects here are similar to the actions. 
For example, generosity results in wealth. 
Hearing of the Dharma results in wisdom. 
Karma, be it wholesome or unwholesome, is modified by the conditions under which the actions are performed. 
In other words, a wholesome or unwholesome action may be more or less strong depending upon the conditions under which it is done. 
The conditions which determine the weight or strength of karma may be divided into those which refer to the subject - the doer of the action - and those which refer to the object - the being to whom the action is done. 
So the conditions that determine the weight of karma apply to the subject and object of the action. 
Specifically, if we take the example of killing, in order for the act of killing to have its complete and unmitigated power, five conditions must be present - a living being, the awareness of the existence of a living being, the intention to kill the living being, the effort or action of killing the living being, and the consequent death of the living being. 
Here too, we can see the subjective and the objective conditions. 
The subjective conditions are the awareness of the living being, the intention to kill and the action of killing. 
The objective conditions are the presence of the living being and the consequent death of the living being.
Similarly, there are five conditions that modify the weight of karma and they are persistent, repeated action; action done with great intention and determination; action done without regret; action done towards those who possess extraordinary qualities; and action done towards those who have benefited one in the past. 
The subjective conditions are persistent action; action done with intention; and action done without regret. 
If one does an unwholesome action again and again with great intention and without regret, the weight of the action will be enhanced. 
The objective conditions are the quality of the object to whom actions are done and the nature of the relationship. 
In other words, if one does a wholesome or unwholesome action towards living beings who possess extraordinary qualities such as the arhats, or the Buddha, the wholesome or unwholesome action done will have greater weight. 
Finally the power of wholesome or unwholesome action done towards those who have benefited one in the past, such as one's parents, teachers and friends, will be greater.
The objective and subjective conditions together determine the weight of karma. This is important because understanding this will help us to understand that karma is not simply a matter of black and white, or good and bad. 
Karma is moral action and moral responsibility. But the working of the Law of Karma is very finely tuned and balanced so as to match effect with cause, so as to take into account the subjective and objective conditions that determine the nature of an action. 