Is Buddhism a religion or philosophy?
Buddhism is a religion. 
First I'll show you why. Then I'll show you why I am wrong.
What is popularly thought of as Buddhism in the United States is not representative of Buddhism in the world at all. 
Much of Mahayana Buddhism is religious. 
For example, Pure Land Buddhism--a Japanese branch of Mahayana--has many parallels to the theistic religions. 
Pure Land is centered around Amhitaba, who has trans-human power and resides in a pure Buddha-field, where his followers after they die reside free of the cycle of rebirth (but short of Nirvana.) 
Some followers of Pure Land believe that reincarnation into the Pure Land requires little more than belief in Amhitaba. 
If you are asking the question of whether Buddhism is a religion, you are probably not familiar with Mahayana, the most popular branch of Buddhism in the world.
There has been Buddhism in the United States since at least 1898, when two Japanese Buddhist priests of the Jodo Shinshu school arrived in San Francisco. 
Despite shrinking due to anti-Japanese prejudice during World War II and Japanese-American assimilation into American culture, this sect has remained the most popular of the American Buddhist religions. 
But after World War II and especially in the 1960s, a form of Zen Buddhism began to gain adherents, primarily among non-Asians. 
This form was, in a sense, non-religious, as articulated by Daisetz Suzuki, one of its chief popularizers, in "An Introduction to Zen Buddhism":
Zen has no God to worship, no ceremonial rites to observe, no future abode to which the dead are destined, and ... no soul whose welfare is to be looked after by somebody else and whose immortality is a matter of intense concern.
Many American practitioners of Buddhism believe in something that might be best called "primitive" Buddhism, a core set of beliefs that are as confined to what the Buddha himself reportedly said as can be reasonably accommodated as a coherent system. 
These beliefs are common to almost all branches of Buddhism and are articulated in many popular books (my favorite is Thich Nhat Hanh's "The Heart of the Buddha's Teachings") and whether this subset of beliefs is a philosophy or religion is probably what this question is actually asking.
But keep in mind that this minimum viable subset of Buddhist belief relates to the traditional Buddhist religions much like the actual words of Jesus relate to Christianity: they are sacred and universally believed, but in practice and belief are only a small part of such elaborately articulated religions as Catholicism. 
This elaboration is, of course, an almost universal pattern in religious development. 
Many of the popularizers of Buddhism to the West are teaching what they think newcomers can accept, believing that acceptance of some belief is better than rejection of all. 
This particularly makes sense in a religion like Buddhism, where learning takes place gradually over many, many lifetimes.
Religion and philosophy share many concerns.
Buddhism, even in its "primitive" form, shares almost all of the concerns of a religion, and very little of the sole concerns of philosophy. 
Buddhism clearly defines an eschatology, a soteriology and a mythology (note: mythology in this context means 'sacred narrative', not 'made-up story.') Whether or not 'primitive' Buddhism has a pneumatology is arguable; Mahayana certainly does. (Also note, I am using pneumatology as a catch-all for beliefs about divine beings and human interaction with them, not merely in the more common Christian sense. 
Perhaps there is a better word.)
But, in the end, Buddhism puts the question of whether it is a philosophy or religion right back at you. 
Start with a definition of the goals of philosophy. Mark Siderits, in "Buddhism as Philosophy" says:
What sets philosophy apart as a discipline is more its concern with how to answer questions than the answers themselves. 
To study philosophy is to learn to think carefully and critically about complex issues. It is not necessarily to learn the 'answers' that the discipline has arrived at.
This makes the question of whether Buddhism is a religion more complex. 
Buddhism does not ask you to accept its core principles on faith, it does not ask you to simply believe the results of someone else's gnosis.
The famous story of the Buddha's visit to the Kalamas 
The Kalamas who were inhabitants of Kesaputta sitting on one side said to the Blessed One: "There are some monks and brahmins, venerable sir, who visit Kesaputta. 
They expound and explain only their own doctrines; the doctrines of others they despise, revile, and pull to pieces. 
Some other monks and brahmins too, venerable sir, come to Kesaputta. 
Venerable sir, there is doubt, there is uncertainty in us concerning them. Which of these reverend monks and brahmins spoke the truth and which falsehood?"
"It is proper for you, Kalamas, to doubt, to be uncertain; uncertainty has arisen in you about what is doubtful. 
Do not go upon what has been acquired by repeated hearing; nor upon tradition; nor upon rumor; nor upon what is in a scripture; nor upon surmise; nor upon an axiom; nor upon specious reasoning; nor upon a bias towards a notion that has been pondered over; nor upon another's seeming ability; nor upon the consideration, 'The monk is our teacher.' 
Kalamas, when you yourselves know: 'These things are bad; these things are blamable; these things are censured by the wise; undertaken and observed, these things lead to harm and ill,' abandon them.
In other words, the Buddha does not want you to believe, he wants you to seek out the truth--the very essence of philosophical enquiry. 
Over the course of thousands of lives, you will have the opportunity to believe many things and your experience will be a guide to which are correct and which are not. 
The Buddha was confident that in the course of your existence you would engage in experimental philosophy, eventually ending up discovering the truth, as he himself did.
