Enlightenment Therapy 
II. The Marriage of Buddha and Freud Zen and psychoanalysis have been courting for decades, as dizzy with their differences as a couple in a screwball comedy. 
The two disciplines -- one, a much-revised theory of mind and therapy for neurotic illness from fin de siecle Vienna; the other a largely unchanged spiritual technique for realizing enlightenment from fifth-century China -- broadly share the goal of relieving mental suffering. 
But their metaphysical premises and practical methods are night and day.
Psychoanalysis, of course, began as a flashlight safari into the darkness of the human psyche. Bring even a bit of the benighted unconscious to light, and neurotic patients might be relieved of their symptoms, free to enjoy, in Freud's famous phrase, "common human unhappiness." 
With its staple ideas about unconscious conflicts, the hidden freight of feelings, the secret intelligibility of dreams, psychoanalysis is essentially an exploration of how meaning arises in the mind.
What darkness is to psychoanalysis, light is to Zen. 
In pursuit of mystic illumination, "the vast ocean of dazzling light," Zen is cheerfully unconcerned with the manufacture and distribution of personal meaning. 
It tends to discount the authority of the unconscious and to ignore the significance of dreams. 
Students are discouraged from delving into the content of emotions. 
Where psychoanalysis is keen to unpack a patient's past -- especially those aspects of the past that distort perception in the present -- Zen dwells on awareness in the present. 
This! 
Here! 
Now! 
Zen masters have been known to whack students with a stick.
It's no surprise that such an unlikely pair got off to a rocky start. 
For decades the feeling of being "one" with the universe, prized in Zen as an attribute of enlightenment, was belittled by many psychoanalysts as an "infantile regression." 
By the same token, the injunction "know thyself," the ultimate chocolate-cherry in the candy box of Western wisdom, was brushed off by Zen adherents as a delusion. 
What's to know about a conceit that has no fixed reality and more often than not is an impediment to experiencing Buddha nature? The self, as one Rinzai teacher put it bluntly, "is a malignant growth which is to be surgically removed."
But by the middle of the last century, Zen and psychoanalysis were warming up to each other. 
The views of the relational school of psychoanalysis, which emerged in the 1980s to critique "the myth of the isolated mind," fit comfortably with the Zen notion that suffering comes from the misperception that we are separate from the world. 
By 1994, when some 500 Buddhists and psychoanalysts gathered for a conference at the Harvard Club in New York City, a number of analysts had regular meditation practices and were incorporating Buddhist ideas in their work. 
Among them was Jeffrey B. Rubin. 
At the time he was 41. 
He grew up on Long Island, the elder of two boys; his mother was a social worker, his father an executive for Burlington Menswear.
Rubin's interest in Buddhism and psychoanalysis can be traced to the last five seconds of a high-school basketball game he played for the Woodmere Academy Wolverines on Long Island in February 1971. 
As the short but sharpshooting point guard, he got the ball at half court, with the Wolverines trailing by a point. 
As he dribbled up the left side, the din of the crowd dropped away; an uncanny feeling of clarity and peace came over him; time slowed. 
After he shot from the top of the key, he heard the roar in the gym break in like the sound resuming in a movie. 
He lingered in the locker room after his teammates dressed, hardly caring that the Wolverines won or that he was the hero. 
A door had opened onto another world.
After graduating from Princeton, where he was a literature major, he was still confounded by the realm he'd glimpsed. 
He attended a Buddhist retreat and took up meditation. 
At night he immersed himself in the literature of Buddhism and yoga, Krishnamurti and Freud. 
During the day he worked in a halfway house for schizophrenics, more intrigued now by actual characters than by characters in texts. 
He got a master's in social work at Columbia, and later a Ph.D. in psychology from Union Institute and University. 
At Lenox Hill Hospital, he entered a training program in psychoanalysis and in 1980 opened his own practice.
By the 1994 conference at the Harvard Club, Rubin was convinced that "the marriage of Buddha and Freud" would benefit both disciplines. 
"When you combine the best of Buddhism and psychoanalysis," he told me one day last winter, "you get a full-spectrum view of human nature focused on both health and spiritual potential as well as on the psychological forces we struggle with and the obstacles we unconsciously put in our way." 
But people at the conference still seemed bunkered in their doctrines, and he often found himself tacking between camps. 
He was scheduled to summarize a dialogue between a Buddhist and a psychoanalyst, but he was suddenly struck by the fallacy that enlightenment meant complete freedom from self-deception. 
He stayed up till 5 a.m. drafting a new talk, "The Emperor of Enlightenment May Have No Clothes." 
Two years later he published his first book, "Psychotherapy and Buddhism." 
Ten years after that -- a decade in which he refined his pioneering approach to Buddhism and psychoanalysis, published two more books and began his own studies of Zen -- the ultimate patient appeared in his office.