Teachings of Buddha 
This article discusses a few of the basic teachings of Buddah.
While you might not be into Eastern philosophy, the teachings of Buddha can have an impact on your life in many ways, whether you know it or not. 
Here are a few words of advice from someone who understands the key to happiness.
Life is so hard, how can we be anything but kind? 
You know your life isn't easy- you live it every day. 
But have you ever stopped to think that we as the human race are all in the same boat? 
No matter if you have money, or friends, or a great job, you still probably think your life is lacking something. 
Everyone feels that way. 
Your rich neighbor has marital problems; your happy in-laws wish they had enough money to retire early. 
Life is hard for everyone, and it is for that reason that we should live our lives with kindness and compassion for everyone we encounter. 
The key isn't how easy we can make our lives; it's how kind we can be while living our lives. 
Buddha teaches that our sorrows and wounds are healed only when we touch with compassion. 
Everyone has some kind of sorrow or wound in their soul. You do, I do, your friends do. 
Most people walk around with their hidden wounds, wondering if they can ever be healed. 
People spend countless hours and time in therapy seeking healing. 
But there really is a simple way to get that relief, and it comes from within. 
We must treat ourselves with compassion, the way we would respond to the sorrows of a friend. 
If you can only befriend yourself and learn to love and nurture yourself, you can heal any wounds you have. 
Joy comes not through possessions or ownership but through a wise and loving heart. 
This is a tricky one for most people. 
Our society is based on commercialism and consumerism, and we are brought up to believe we must keep up with the Jones in order to be happy. 
We spend, spend, spend. 
What we end up with is a lot of stuff we don't need or want and an empty feeling that doesn't go away. 
Instead of focusing on gaining possessions, true happiness comes from focusing on your heart. 
Get to know your true dreams and desires, and learn what you need to make you happy. 
Listen to your heart and it will tell you all you need to know. 
Each morning we are born again. 
What we do today is what matters most. 
We only have one chance to live the life we are given, but each new day is a new beginning. 
It's a gift to us -the chance to do today what we didn't do yesterday. 
It doesn't matter what you did yesterday, or what you didn't do. 
You have another day love, nurture, and reach out with kindness to your fellow man. 
If yesterday wasn't exactly what you would have liked, don't beat yourself up over it. 
Treat yourself with love and compassion and do it right today. 
And don't forget, you have tomorrow too. 
Buddha says that health is the greatest gift, contentment the greatest wealth. 
These are things we all tend to overlook or take for granted because they aren't necessarily how our society measures success. 
But just think about if you didn't have your health. 
It would be the only thing you would want. 