How to Clean Your Gold Jewellery 
Not everyone can afford to take a trip to the jewellery store every time their jewellery pieces need a proper cleaning. 
The great news is that there are a few tips on how to clean your gold jewellery that you can actually use in cleaning different types of jewellery pieces. 
Unlike silver, gold doesn't tarnish, but it can still easily accumulate dirt and grime over time. 
If you want to keep your gold jewellery scratch-free, clean and sparkling without any fuss, here are tried and true ways to clean gold jewellery.
Find out whether your gold jewellery is lightly or heavily soiled 
If your gold jewellery is lightly soiled, wash your jewellery pieces in a solution of warm water and several drops of dish soap. 
If there's plenty of debris and gunk built up on your jewellery pieces, try using club soda to bubble off the dirt. 
Whether your gold jewellery is lightly or heavily soiled, allow it to soak for about 15 minutes before you scrub off the dirt.
Use a very soft toothbrush 
When scrubbing off the dirt, make sure you use a very soft toothbrush. 
When buying a toothbrush in the store, look for a label on it that will tell you whether it has soft bristles or firm ones. 
If you are on a tight budget, consider going to the dollar store where you can easily buy a toothbrush that has soft bristles. You don't have to buy an expensive brush to clean your gold jewellery. 
If you have a new eyebrow brush that you don't use, you can use it to clean your gold jewellery as well. 
Just make a few gentle circles while you're scrubbing with the eyebrow brush or toothbrush.
Use ammonia 
Since scrubbing with the water and dish soap solution won't get your jewellery pieces looking radiant, you can brighten them up by using the water and ammonia solution. 
Mix one part of ammonia with six parts of water and soak your jewellery pieces for a minute before rinsing and drying them. 
Don't use ammonia every time you clean gold jewellery because it can darken it.
Rinse thoroughly with warm, running water 
You can use the eyebrow brush or toothbrush to continue to scrub a little as you're rinsing every jewellery piece. 
When rinsing it, inspect each one and see if there is any junk stuck in the grooves on a certain piece. Give each piece one more scrub, if needed, and then pat it dry with a very soft, nap-free cloth.
Don't submerge gemstones 
When cleaning pieces of jewellery with gemstones, make sure you don't submerge gemstones. 
Take a soft cloth and dip it in the water and soap solution. Gently dab the piece clean and rinse thoroughly with warm, running water. 
Turn the jewellery piece upside down so that any excess water can drain away.
Use toothpaste 
Apply a little bit of toothpaste to your soft-bristled toothbrush to clean your gold jewellery. 
Rinse thoroughly with warm, running water and enjoy your clean jewellery pieces. 
It's a cheap way to clean gold jewellery that really works!
Boil it
You can remove any build-up of wax and grease by boiling it. 
Just dip your jewellery pieces in boiling water and the grease and wax will come right off. 
When any signs of wax and grease are removed, use the soap and water solution or the ammonia and water solution to clean your jewellery as I mentioned above.
Sure, it takes time and efforts to clean gold jewellery at home, but it's a great way to save some money. 
Give it a try and you will like it! What is your favorite way to clean your gold jewellery?
