Easy homemade skin lightening mask - Anna Belle (Annabel)
Go to the supermarket to buy a mask to worry about allergies, including issues such as chemicals, Anna Belle with your homemade skin lightening mask! 
Who can buy mask, whitening mask easily move their hands appear ~
As the saying goes a white cover 100 ugly, women born to white, through diet homemade skin lightening mask to make women more beautiful. 
Speaking of homemade mask, I believe many women will feel cumbersome and time-consuming, in fact, there are homemade mask is not so difficult, through simple daily food can make a whitening mask, himself once a day facials, beauty and money, along with Annabel children (Anna Belle) together make it ~
Women home-made whitening mask, simple and effective:
[Yogurt granola whitening mask]
Prepare materials: yogurt, oatmeal 
Take 2 tablespoons of yogurt with a spoon, spoon oatmeal, put them in the bowl after each tune spreads in the face, apply 20 minutes after the wash with warm water. 
Anna Belle yogurt contains hydrogen Queensland derivatives, can break down the skin's aging skin cells, inhibit and eliminate the pigment spots, and therefore have a good oat yogurt spot cosmetic effect. 
Yogurt and oatmeal vitamin e and other active substances on the skin freckle whitening effect!
[Freckle lemon honey mask]
Prepare materials: lemon, honey, plain flour 
With a lemon squeezed orange juice, fresh lemon juice and honey, flour and mix thoroughly, apply to the face after cleansing the face, 10 minutes after the face wash. 
Lemon juice rich in vitamin c whitening can brighten the complexion, and honey but also can play a moisturizing skin effect, after rinsing the skin will become smooth and delicate!
[Coffee almond protein freckle mask]
Prepare materials: almonds, coffee powder, a protein 
Anna Belle (Annabel) almonds with hot water till soft, mashed almond mud and mud after the coffee powder, protein Stir, placed in a sealed bottle, before going to sleep every night can go evenly applied to the face, the same day night without cleaning, wake up the next morning with warm water to clean. 
Coffee powder can help remove aging skin, and can drain the swelling, so rinsing coffee almond protein mask facial edema, do not worry there will be problems, use almond coffee protein mask to make your skin become white and tender.
[Aloe freckle Mask]
Prepare materials: Aloe Honey 
It will take an aloe leaf peeled and mashed leaf juice (aloe very easy to live their own to the market to buy one kind of flower at home, at any time can be used to make mask), add 1 tablespoon flour and 1 tablespoon honey, and mix thoroughly . 
Static apply 10 minutes after the wash. 
Aloe Vera has a good calming and soothing effect, this mask is also very suitable for sensitive skin you.
[Rose peach freckle Mask]
Prepare materials: dry rose petals, walnuts, flour 
The walnuts (10 grams) grinding into powder, add flour (10 g), and then transferred to the water and thoroughly mixed dry rose petals added (10 g) in peach paste, put on the fire to simmer until Rose Softening, pink batter, let cool will mask evenly coated in the face, wash after 30 minutes. 
Anna Belle (Annabel) Rose has the role of blood, can be effectively suppressed the production of melanin. 
Peach is get rid of congestion, anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic effect, can inhibit hyperpigmentation, fade spots, peach roses freckle mask making is strongly recommended a lot of crush.
Mask is not necessarily going to the supermarket, cosmetic shops to buy, Anna Belle recommended several whitening, freckle mask effect, and affordable, for your beautiful points.
