7 Home-Made Hair Treatments 
BAKING SODA
If you feel your hair is getting a lot of build up from your hair products, try mixing a tablespoon of baking soda with a little bit of water to make a paste. Massage into your damp hair and allow the paste to sit for at least 15 minutes before you rinse it out. Follow up with shampoo and conditioner.
AVOCADO
Avocado works great as a home-made hair treatment to tame frizzy hair. 
The oils and proteins of an avocado add moisture to hair and help control fly-aways. 
Massage a half of a mashed up avocado into damp, clean hair. Let the mixture sit on the hair for 15 minutes. 
For best results use this #avocado mixture on your hair every two weeks.
CORNMEAL AND CORNSTARCH
If oily hair is what's been giving you troubles lately you can fight back using some cornmeal or cornstarch. 
Sprinkle no more than a tablespoon of either ingredient, not both, onto your dry hair and scalp. Rub it gently in your scalp to really soak up the oil. 
After 10 minutes, use a big paddle hairbrush to brush out all the remaining cornmeal or cornstarch out of your hair.
EGG MASK
Raw egg works wonders as a home-made hair treatment. 
Ladies with normal hair can use the entire egg to treat their hair. However, girls with oily hair should use the egg whites only, and girls with dry hair should use just the egg yolk. 
Massage whatever part of the egg is best for your hair type all over the scalp and hair. Let it sit for 20 minutes before rinsing out with cool water.
LEMON JUICE AND OLIVE OIL
Lemon juice and olive oil mixture helps fight dry flakes in your hair. 
Mix equal parts of lemon juice, water, and olive oil together. Apply this home-made hair treatment to your damp scalp. Let the mixture stay in your hair for at least 20 minutes before rinsing out and shampooing your hair.
BEER
Who would have thought beer would work as a home-made hair treatment? Well, it does -especially if you have flat, limp hair. 
Pour a flat beer into a spray bottle and spritz hair all over to add volume and body. 
But wait- That's not all! The ingredients in beer work to strengthen your hair so you won't only get luscious volume but condition your hair as well!
MAYO
Mayo works as an excellent hair defrizzer, helping your #hairstyle maintain its sheen and shape despite your hair's weakness to damp weather. 
Let the mayo sit on your hair for 30 minutes, then wash it out.
