Whip Up A Super-Chic DIY Pom Pom Necklace 
Alright, we're about to really flex our DIY muscles, here. 
We recently spotted this killer Tory Burch pom-pom necklace in a magazine, only to find out that it isn't yet available--sad face. 
But instead of sulking over something we couldn't have, we put our gears in motion to figure out how to make it ours. 
And, while we're not sure how much the original would have cost us, we're willing to bet that ours is, in fact, way, way cheaper, and just as nice. Sure, those little balls of color might look complicated, but trust us -- if you've been able to master our other DIY projects, then this one will be a breeze. 
Here's what you'll need: 
Seed beads in a variety of colors -- we used yellow, orange, and red.
Embroidery floss in a variety of colors -- we used orange, yellow, green, blue, and red
Large brass endcaps
Small brass endcaps
Brass jump rings
Brass lobser-claw clasp
Needle-nose pliers
Super glue
A butter knife
A pair of scissors
White cotton cord, available at home improvement stores 
Step 1 -- Take one of the large endcaps and put a dab of super glue on the inside.
Step 2 -- Grab a jump ring with the needle nose pliers and insert it into the brass endcap, so that it sticks into the super glue.
Step 3 -- The jump ring should be standing up inside the endcap, so that you can later thread embroidery floss through it.
Step 4 -- Take one color of embroidery floss and begin to wrap it around the blade of a butter knife. 
Make sure to hold on to the lose end so that it doesn't unravel.
Step 5 -- Wrap the first color of embroidery floss around the knife a few times, and then cut it off from the bundle. 
Begin to wrap a new color of floss around the knife, holding both loose ends together. 
Note that you don't have to be neat and orderly with the colors when wrapping them, but you do ultimately want a small bundle of floss that's about 1/2-inch wide or slightly smaller.
Step 6 -- Repeat step five for the remaining colors of floss, until you have wrapped all of them around the knife. 
Feel free to repeat colors to make your bundle thicker, resulting in a fuller pom-pom.
Step 7 -- Snip snip!
Step 8 -- Cut a piece of floss about 5-inches long.
Step 9 -- Carefully slide the bundle of floss off of the knife, being very careful to not squish or unravel it.
Step 10 -- Take the piece of floss you cut in step 7 and tie it around the middle of the bundle. You should have two closed loops of floss on either side -- it should sort of look like an "8".
Step 11 -- Using a pair of scissors, cut through the loops in the bundle.
Step 12 -- Carefully fluff out the floss fibers, making sure to not pull them out of the bundle. 
Fluff the fibers outwards and start shaping the bundle into a round shape.
Step 13 -- Take the scissors and begin to trim the tips of the floss, until you have a ball that's round and dense. 
Do not cut off the longer piece of floss from step 7.
Step 14 -- Repeat steps 4-13 seven more times, to make eight pom-poms. 
Feel free to make them slightly different sizes, but none of them should be more than an inch in diameter.
Step 15 -- Cut four pieces of embroidery floss, about 6-inches long.
Step 16 -- Thread one piece of embroidery floss at a time through the jump ring in the endcap from step 3. Repeat until all four pieces of floss are threaded through.
Step 17 -- Tie the four pieces of floss into a knot.
Step 18 -- You should now have eight pieces of floss hanging from the jump ring.
Step 19 -- Take one of the eight strands of floss and begin to thread a series of seven seed beads onto it. 
We used three red, two orange, and two yellow beads.
Step 20 -- Take one of your pom-pons and tie the two long, lose threads onto the thread you just beaded in step 18. 
Make sure your knot is secure and the pom-pom does not slide off.
Step 21 -- Cut off any excess threads.
Step 22 -- Repeat steps 18-20 for the remaining pom-poms with varying lengths. 
When you're finished, use the pliers to attach a jump ring to the top of the endcap. 
Step 23 -- Cut a piece of cotton cord about 1 1/2-2 feet long, depending on how long or short you want the finished necklace to be.
Step 24 -- Take a small endcap and put a dab of super glue on the inside.
Step 25 -- Stick one end of the cotton cord into the endcap and push it down, so it adheres to the glue. 
Repeat with the other side of the cotton cord. 
If you added too much glue and it spills out onto your fingers, don't freak out! Simply soak a cotton ball with acetone nail polish remover and rub over the glue on your skin to remove it.
Step 26 -- Open the jump ring on top of the endcap with all of your pom-poms, and slip the cotton cord inside. Close the jump ring.
Step 27 -- Using the pliers, squeeze the jump ring so that it flattens and doesn't slide feely around the cotton cord.
Step 28 -- Repeat steps 25 and 26 to attach the remaining two sets of pom-poms. 
Attach a jump ring to one of the endcaps attached to the cotton cord. Attach a jump ring, and then a lobster-claw clasp to the other endcap.
You're done! 
Take your colorful little necklace out for a spin, and be sure to let everyone know that yes, you made this.
