Beef Up Your Ranch Kitchen 
Ranch-style homes are notorious for having small kitchens. While the trend is to open these kitchens up by knocking down walls and creating open-plan living areas, there are other options.
There are benefits to working in a small kitchen. 
For one, everything is at your fingertips. Your triangular arrangement of sink, stove and refrigerator is tight, making cooking an easy dance between the three. 
Second, a closed-off kitchen means the mess and smells stay somewhat hidden. 
Third, small kitchens make it difficult for several people to work at once. 
While that might be a detriment to some, I love it! 
I love keeping my kitchen to myself, working in my own little space and knowing exactly where every little thing is.
Join me today as we look at some ideas for making your ranch kitchen work better.
Faiella Design 
When space is tight, every inch counts-including the ceiling. 
Make a grand statement with the lighting in your kitchen and draw the eye up. 
Visually expanding the space upward is a welcome distraction from crowded corners.
Amy Birdsong 
Perhaps you would like to add a little life to your kitchen. 
Why not try a bold paint color on your cabinets? 
This yellow-green really gives this kitchen an injection of personality.
Rina Magen 
A ranch-style kitchen is typically small, so instead of trying to fight the obvious, why not play off its scaled-down nature? 
Instead of a giant copper hood, go for a smaller-size hood and stovetop to fit the space.
Praktyczne i Pi?kne 
When storage space is lacking, consider moving some kitchen items to another room. 
Using a traditional hutch or an updated thrift store dresser is a great way to store additional dishes and flatware in an unused nook of your dining room.
Laurie Burke 
The absolute number-one improvement for a small ranch kitchen is to add a window above the sink. 
It is a classic placement for a window, and many ranch homes are already blessed with one. 
Breaking up the bowling alley feel and offering a vista from the cozy nest of your kitchen is a much-needed boost to the ranch kitchen. 
Extending out with a bay window is even better.
NURIT GEFFEN-BATIM STUDIO
Here is another way of creating a bay-window effect in a modern composition. 
Notice how the countertop extends into the nook behind the sink, leaving plenty of rooms for herbs, sprouts and other plants.
Pangaea Interior, Portland, OR 
Extending the window to the ceiling completely opens up the space in a tiny kitchen. 
Imagine how dark this kitchen would be without this large expanse of glass. 
The juxtaposistion of sunlight with the deep, dark wood in the space is just right.
Michael Minadeo+Partners
If you have low ceilings (hello, classic ranch), you may not have the ability to put in a large bank of tall windows. 
You might, however, have a nice long, horizontal space for a row of windows. 
The windows here serve as a perfect frame for the mountains outside, and I bet there is fighting over who gets to do the dishes in this kitchen!
Cuppett Architects 
Working with small spaces in a traditional ranch-style home can often be a challenge, but it is possible to create a space you love to live in. 
By utilizing creative storage, opening up views with windows and other features, and giving your space life and personality, you can truly make your ranch kitchen a pleasing home on the range.
