Get Quartz and Porcelain Surfaces Super Clean
Maintaining the new and sleek appearance of your home doesn't have to be a painful and time-intensive process; as a general rule, the more often you clean, the less time and money you'll have to spend on major cleaning overhauls. 
But as kitchen and bath designerKayron Brewer says, it's really about making smart decisions when it comes to your surfaces: "Choose the right materials for the right applications and uses -- especially when you are talking about the kitchen and bath."
Here are a few tips on how to clean tiles, sinks and countertops that are made of a variety of materials.
Natural Quartz 
Quartz is one of the hardest minerals found in nature, so it's a fitting material for the busiest space in the home: the kitchen. 
Quartz countertops are made from crushed pure natural quartz combined with a small amount of pigment and resin. 
This combination of materials allows quartz to be a dense, nonporous stone that is both scratch and stain resistant with no sealing required.
However, says kitchen and bath designer Gary Lichlyter, "you really can't tell the difference [in terms of surface gloss and sheen] between a sealed and nonsealed quartz countertop. 
Sealing takes just a few minutes but can really help protect your quartz surface for long-term use, so I highly recommend it."
Cambria quartz boasts of the most simple maintenance regimen: Wash the surface with a soft cotton cloth and warm water with a mild dish soap. 
According to the company website, "Cambria is durable and more resistant to surface damage than other stone. 
However, all stone can be damaged by force and no stone is chip-proof. 
Objects hitting edges particularly at sinks or dishwashers may cause chips."
Remember, natural stone surfaces like quartz can also be damaged by sudden and rapid changes of temperature as well as direct contact with hot pots and pans. 
Always use a potholder to protect the natural quartz surface.
For tough stains: Quartz countertops are meant to be stain free, as the surface does not absorb liquids.
Stay away from: Bleach and abrasive products.
Travertine 
The biggest issue people have with cleaning and maintaining a travertine shower is soap scum. 
Soap scum can damage tiles and ruin the look of a travertine shower. 
Also, hard water deposits can also start to accumulate in a travertine shower.
"A travertine-tiled showeris a constantly wet surface, so upon installation, I strongly urge people to apply the best sealer that money can buy to protect their travertine shower," says Lichlyter.
For tough stains:Lichlyter recommends zero-pH cleaners, which are readily available in home improvement stores.
Stay away from: "Commercial cleaners that smell good but have petroleum in the ingredients," says Lichlyter. 
"Petroleum sits on tile grout and causes residue and a dirty-looking appearance." 
Also avoid acidic substances like vinegar as well as abrasive cleaners and dish soap containing citrus oil.
Porcelain Sinks 
Kitchen and bath designerAngie Keyes' cleaning regimen for porcelain sinks is simple: She uses a Magic Eraser or a disinfecting bathroom cleaner likeComet, which comes in a nonabrasive, bleach-free liquid solution made for porcelain and ceramic surfaces.
Lichlyter adds, "Tried and tested brands like American Standard and Kohler have porcelain surfaces that can handle all kinds of cleansers." 
For tough stains:Lichlyter recommends applying a bit of powder cleanser on the scuff marks and letting it sit for a few minutes before scrubbing the powder off with a scrub brush. 
Blogger Desireeswears by soft cleanser Bar Keepers Friend, which works without having to use bleach on the surface. 
"Apply a small amount [of Bar Keepers Friend] directly on the areas where you see stains. ... 
You'll see the stains disappear before your eyes."
Stay away from: Bleach, which will eventually eat through the enamel seal on the porcelain.
Engineered Stone 
Engineered stone countertops are made of 93 percent natural stone and 7 percent polymers and are highly resistant to scratches and stains. 
"Engineered stone countertops are highly resilient, but high temperatures will damage the polymers and can also damage your counters," says Lichlyter. 
Use a hot-pot pad when placing heated objects on engineered stone surfaces.
For countertops with a smooth and matte look, use a mild soap and water solution to clean and polish the surface.
For tough stains: Multipurpose cleaners and detergents applied to scouring pads should take care of tough stains by transferring the dirt from the surface to the pad; the rough pad will not damage your countertop surface.
Stay away from: "Avoid using harsh chemicals like bleach or ammonia," says Whitsunday Marble & Granite. 
"To clean engineered stone we recommend water and a mild detergent. 
Engineered stone is tough, but not indestructible."
