How To Reduce Excess Fat Around The Waist 
Worries about how belly fat looks pale in comparison to the dangers it poses to your overall health. 
Abdominal fat consists of two types of fat: subcutaneous fat, which lies just below your skin; and visceral fat, which settles deep inside your abdomen and wraps around your internal organs. 
Visceral fat produces hormones that increase your risk of serious medical conditions such as breast cancer and diabetes. 
It's also linked to heart disease and high blood pressure. 
Step 1
Limit your intake of fatty foods such as whole dairy and fatty cuts of meat. 
Switch to skinless poultry and fish. 
Choose low-fat or fat-free dairy and use egg whites instead of whole eggs. 
Use healthy oils such as olive oil for cooking instead of butter.
Step 2
Eat about 2  1/2 cups of fruit and vegetables daily. 
Since fruits are low in fat and rich in fiber, they help stabilize levels of blood glucose and insulin, which increase abdominal fat.
Step 3
Increase your aerobic activity level to about 30 or 60 minutes, five days a week. 
Aerobic exercise is an efficient way to burn excess calories and fat all over your body.
Step 4
Strength train at least twice a week using weights, a weight machine, resistance bands or weight machines. 
Weight training increases muscle mass, which increases calorie burning and helps reduce stomach fat. 
Do two to three sets of 8 to 12 repetitions of each muscle-building exercise
Step 5
Drink a cup of green tea daily. 
Green tea contains antioxidants called catechins that can effectively reduce visceral and subcutaneous fat, according to a study published in a 2009 issue of the "Journal of Nutrition."
Step 6
Sleep for about seven to nine hours each night to help regulate levels of cortisol, which increases fat storage around your abdomen. 
To get more quality sleep, finish exercising at least three to four hours before going to sleep, cut back on caffeine and do not eat a large meal within three hours of going to bed.
