18 WAYS TO SLOW DOWN AGING AND KEEP YOUR SKIN LOOKING YOUNG
Drink lots of water. 
If you are sufficiently hydrated, this will be evident in your complexion. 
So make sure you get at least 8 ounces of water daily. 
Water is your best bet to keep your body hydrated. 
Besides being the most accessible, it??s also calorie-free, unlike soda, iced tea and other beverages.
Never go outdoors without using sunscreen. 
The UV radiation from the sun damages the skin and speeds up the aging process. 
You may need to use a higher SPF if you plan to stay outdoors for long durations.
Limit the use of tanning beds. 
Studies show that frequent use of tanning beds can lead to melanoma -- a type of skin cancer that's linked with excessive exposure to UV radiation. 
If you prefer to get a tan, do it naturally.
Minimize sleeping on your side and face down. 
The friction between your skin and the pillow can lead to furrowed brows and fine lines.
Take time-out from makeup. 
It??s okay to wear makeup occasionally, but keep in mind that the harsh ingredients found in foundations, blushes and other kinds of makeup may contain components that speed up skin aging. 
Skipping makeup every once in a while helps maintain your skin's elasticity and hydration.
Never sleep with makeup on. 
The layer of makeup will prevent the normal process of skin shedding, which further slows down renewal. The result is dull and uneven skin.
Take vitamin C supplements. 
Vitamin C supplements are potent defense against free radicals that cause damage to the skin. 
It's also great for brightening uneven skin tone and minimizes age spots too.
Get regular exercise. 
The increase in blood circulation is good for your skin as it removes the toxin buildup and encourages renewal. 
This is the reason why you get a nice glow after a good workout session.
Limit soda. 
Studies show that soda contains a substance known as phosphates -- a chemical responsible for accelerating aging.
Take time to de-stress yourself. 
Too much stress is not only bad for your mind and body but for your complexion as well. 
Take time off from your schedule every now and then and pamper yourself.
Perhaps get a massage or more sleep than usual.
Don't smoke. 
This is perhaps the quickest way to add an extra 10 years to your appearance. 
Avoid primary and second-hand smoke like an awful plague.
Get at least 7 hours of sleep. 
Beauty rest is no myth. 
Experts have shown that people who get enough rest are far more attractive than those who are sleep-deprived. 
Sleep has also been proven to diminish wrinkles in the face and neck.
Don't wash your face more than twice a day. 
This can strip off your skin's natural moisture and lead to dryness, flaky skin and wrinkles.
Moisturize. 
A well-moisturized skin can make the difference between a healthy complexion and a dull, tired-looking skin. 
Talk to a dermatologist to find out the best moisturizer for your skin type.
Eat plenty of veggies and fruits. 
Pollution, radiation, stress and metabolism can cause oxidative damage to the skin cells. 
The antioxidants in these foods can help protect you from oxidative stress and counter premature aging.
Avoid processed food. 
The preservatives and additives contained in processed food are not only devoid of nutrition but can also add extra more years to your appearance. 
Go for organic and healthier options.
Steam your face. 
Facial steaming is a great way to deep cleanse your pores and improve your skin tone. 
This can also enhance the skin's healthy glow and help reduce dryness and wrinkles. 
Be careful not to overdo it though. 
Once a week is sufficient to get the benefits you need.
Invest on Phytoceramide supplements. 
Phytoceramides are the plant-based equivalent of ceramides -- the natural lipids found in the skin. 
As we age, these ceramides diminish leading to dryness, wrinkles and other signs of skin aging. 
Phytoceramides can add an amazing layer of protection against free radicals and keep the skin youthful.
