HOW TO DRESS LIKE KATE MIDDLETON: CASUAL WEAR (PART 1)
Most of us fancy ourselves as more of a Bridget Jones than a Duchess of Cambridge. 
If a helicopter causes our dress to billow, emblazoning our spanx for all to behold, do we laugh demurely and continue our royal business? 
No. 
We retreat to the toilet, weeping, and consider departing the event by way of the staff exit.
Alas, such social graces must be attained over time, and some of us may never reach their lofty heights. 
What is attainable, however, is Kate's infallible style. 
Here's how.
EVEN FOR A CASUAL LOOK, CLOTHES MUST BE WELL FITTING.
But there is a line between well fitting, and that which resembles spray-on denim. The red jeans Kate wore to play hockey with the Great Britain team in 2012 are an excellent example - flattering, not too long, and suitable for the occasion. 
Steer clear of ultra, ultra skinny jeans or leggings - a cigarette, slim, or straight leg style is preferable (available from 20 pounds on ASOS). 
Think Sandy at the beginning of Grease, rather than the end.
A TAILORED BLAZER IS YOUR KEY TO THE ??SMART-CASUAL' DRESS CODE.
This need not necessitate a pricey trip to Jermyn Street in London. 
A favourite of Kate's is a navy double-breasted number from Zara, which accentuates the waist and dignifies a bland jeans and shirt combination. 
All yours for about 60 pounds. 
Not bad for a solid sartorial investment.
DON'T UNDERESTIMATE THE VALUE OF A BELT.
They enhance any silhouette and make even the most boring of jackets regal. 
Kate's jewel green Catherine Walker coat would have been something of a lesser creation without one.
ONE'S MIDRIFF IS NEVER BARED.
Apart from perhaps in a bikini. 
This is, of course, also true of formalwear.
NOTHING TOO LOW-CUT.
Kate is not a bastion of Puritanical fashion, so a bit of flesh is, on occasion permissible (cf Kate at the Olympics in 2012). 
On the whole, however, Catherine opts for a collar, or higher neckline. 
Be guided by the coveted Zimmermann dress she wore during her New Zealand and Australia tour.
NOTHING TOO SHORT.
Again, note the Zimmermann dress. 
Unless you are planning to stand perfectly still for the duration of the day, a mini skirt is simply not tenable. 
One cannot stoop to greet children or fulfil one's role as a patron of a sport's charity to the necessary degree if a flash of bottom is a genuine threat. 
High street stockists such as L. K. Bennett, Hobbs, Whistles and Reiss are perfect for this type of thing - clearly, as Kate has worn a number of their elegant creations in the past.
KEEP HAIR AND MAKEUP SIMPLE.
Loose waves are effortlessly chic and even look good at the end of the day when they've lost their lustre and are easily achieved with the aid of straighteners or curling tongs. 
Updos extend to a simple ponytail or half up/half down arrangement. 
Skin is flawless, but not smothered in highlighter or blusher. 
A sweep of eyeliner is permissible, but save eye shadow for eveningwear. 
Less is more: one wants to look like a queen of the sovereign, rather than drag, variety.
IF YOU'RE GOING TO WEAR HEELS, OPT FOR SOMETHING COMFORTABLE.
There is no pain quite like that induced by uncomfortable shoes. 
Wedges put less pressure on the balls of your feet than stilettos so are much better if you will be standing for long periods of time (Kate has a lovely tan pair from Russell and Bromley). 
Agonised hobbling from foot to foot is not becoming of a young lady. 
If heels aren't your cup of tea try some stylish brogues - something along the lines of Victoria Beckham's stylish YSL monochrome pair would be a fitting alternative.
SAVE THE BLING FOR FORMALWEAR.
You don't want to be laden with the crown's jewels and then be called upon to hold a urinating koala bear, or participate in an inaugural match of netball. 
They will only get in your way. 
Simple stud earrings are ideal daywear, but reserve your best embellishment for formalwear.
