Fashion Tips for Job Interviews 
Selecting the right clothes for a job interview is more important than ever. 
With so many people out of work, every job has a lot of competition. 
You only get one chance to make a first impression and what you wear to a job interview could be just what you need to tip the job offer in your favor.
Grooming
The first thing to consider for the job interview is your grooming. 
It is important to have a good haircut, subtle make-up, and fresh breath. 
If you have tattoos, make sure they are covered. 
If you have excessive piercings, leave them empty. 
Also, if you must wear perfume, use it sparingly or avoid it totally. 
Clothing should be clean and in excellent condition with buttons and other embellishments attached and loose threads snipped off. 
Shoes should be spotless and scuff-free.
Suits
Women going on interviews should dress for the job. 
If the job is an office job or other professional job, it is appropriate for women to wear a suit. 
The suit could have a matching jacket and skirt or pants, or women can show their fashion style with a coordinating jacket and skirt. 
Even if a woman picks a coordinating, rather than matching suit, the pieces should be conservative and not draw attention away from the point of the interview.
Tops
A nice blouse in a coordinating color or subtle pattern adds a touch of flare to the suit. 
The top should not expose any cleavage. It should completely cover the belly, too. 
If you are wearing a button-front top, it should fit well so that the top does not pull the spaces between the buttons apart to reveal undergarments or skin.
Skirts and Pants
Pants and skirts should fit, without being too tight or too loose. 
If you decide to wear a skirt it should be long enough to reach the tops of the knees, and you should be able to sit comfortably without exposing too much. 
Avoid skirts with high-cut slits or kick pleats. 
Pants should reach the tops of the feet. 
It is better to wear pants with a higher inseam for an interview. 
Wear a belt if you are tucking in your shirt.
Shoes and Hosiery 
Shoes and hosiery add to a professional attitude. 
Women should wear conservative shoes with closed toes. 
Women can wear shoes with heels, but they should not wear stilettos or shoes that are difficult to walk in. 
If you decide to wear a skirt, wear hosiery in a neutral nude or a complimentary color. 
Avoid bright or patterned hosiery for the interview. 
If you wear pants, wear some kind of hosiery like trouser socks so that you donit accidentally flash your ankles during the interview. 
Be sure your socks match, too.
Accessories 
Be conservative by wearing subtle jewelry. 
If you are interviewing in a more artistic environment, then it is appropriate to wear more artistic jewelry, but donit wear too much. 
A lovely pin or scarf can also look nice during an interview. 
Wearing one appropriately memorable piece could be a way for interview committees to remember you.
Dressing appropriately for an interview can be just what you need to get your perfect job. 
Follow a few simple rules and watch the offers come rolling in.
