Art of Putting Outfits Together 
The ability of putting outfits together shapes your style so today we are looking into some basics of creating looks and working on great outfits.
The first thing to remember when putting an outfit together is that it's about you, your taste, your personality, your individuality not a brand, not a designer logo on your bag or shirt. 
Style is something that express your inner state and your preferences and while there is nothing wrong with brand/designer logos, they do not define your style, they do not indicate your level of taste. 
Remember the worst dressed lists of celebrities? They do wear designer clothes but cannot always put an outfit together. 
Again it might be a matter of taste but there are couple of rules for putting outfits together:
Ideal Fit
Ideal fit has not only to do with the clothes size but also with how it suits your body shape. 
When choosing clothing try to be objective about what a certain clothing item does to your figure. 
Does it hide it much? 
Does it reveal too much? Does it shorten your legs, etc.? 
It is important to look good in the clothes you like. 
Unfortunately sometimes the dress you like can make you look short or accentuate something you wanted to hide.
Colors & Prints
Colors and prints are important as they can bring out the best in your eyes, hair and skin tone or make you look pale and dull. 
When buying clothes try on various colors and prints and see which ones make you look best. 
Later when you are putting an outfit together you can use the same colors and prints to accentuate the best in your appearance.
Putting it Together 
There are plenty of ways and formulas of putting and outfit together and making it work. 
The main thing is a little inspiration and fantasy. 
The style is your vision. 
So make this vision help you in creating a fashionable eye catchy look.
Focus point 
You can pick one bold item from your wardrobe and use it as a base around which you will be building the look. 
Try to avoid cliches like white tee and black pants or try to jazz up a banal combination by adding an interesting twist to the outfit like a bold jacket, unexpected footwear or accessories.
Basic Background 
You probably have a range of basic clothing items in your wardrobe like a pencil skirt or black pants, white shirt and a jacket. 
When putting an outfit together you might find that all these things make a basic background but in order to pull them into a look you should pay attention to details like footwear, bags, accessories, hats, and jewelry as those can make a great difference in a plain everyday look.
Mixing colors and shapes 
This might not be easy but experimenting with colors is important if you want to jazz up your outfit and wardrobe in general. 
Again pick colors that suit you best and bring out lively tones in your color skin and hair. 
Start matching and mixing colors, neutrals, basic colors like black and white and pay attention to which textures go well together and which don't. 
This can be done on your computer or designer kit with fabric or color samples but it will later help you put outfits together faster and better.
Shapes are also important. 
Do shoulder pads make up for your small shoulders or do they magnify your wide shoulders? Take into consideration which shapes and cuts suit you. 
Figure out what neck lines you should be wearing to make the most of your appearance and accentuate your assets.
Additional 
You might have been working on that outfit all day but what about hair and makeup?
 These should match your outfit or contrast it in a nice way adding an unexpected twist into your whole look. 
Get the help of a professional in terms of hairstyle for your face shape, keep your face and brows in check and think your makeup through for every outfit. 
If you don't wear much of it, you still should look fresh faced and have neatly shaped eyebrows.
