How to Wear a Scarf in 5 Different Ways 
Wearing a scarf is all about attitude.
The right neck dressing can take an ensemble to the next level and can take a look from good to great. 
From a simple knit scarf to an exorbitant Hermes, they all need to be tied in a way that complements your winter look with warmth and style.
Here are 5 ways of wearing a scarf.
French/European knot 
The most popular of all, this knot is perfect for day-to-day wear. 
Take the scarf and fold it in half, lengthwise. 
Lay it across your neck, and draw the loose ends of the scarf through the other end. 
Don't pull it too tight. 
The casual noose effect goes down well for a sleek urban winter look. 
If you are wearing a casual aviator jacket, this European knot is the perfect neck-addition.
The double flip/single knot 
Place the scarf around your neck so that the two ends are at your back, cross the ends at the back of your neck and bring them around to the front. 
Leave the noose tight or loose as per your choice and comfort level. 
Appropriate for a laidback mode, you can tuck them into your jacket or let them hang loose. 
Perfect weekender look!
Triangular fold
This works best with cotton square scarves with small patterns and short fringes. 
Fold the square in half, making a triangle. 
Grab the two ends of the folded edge and tie them together at the back of your neck, leaving the triangular point front and center, facing down.
It became famous with the Islamic provinces, prevalent as a Keffiyeh. 
Basically a patterned piece of clothing is more suited for this very casual look. 
Can be easily teamed up with a casual aviator jacket.
Overhand knot 
Oh boy! Easiest of the lot. 
If you know how to tie a shoelace, you're set. 
Lay it across your shoulder, take both ends of the scarf and tie them over and under. 
This style is not one exactly for the colder occasions and only takes care of mild autumnal breeze. 
Appropriate for a business look, this Windsor style knot will achieve the desired look with a thin light weight scarf.
Classic Drape 
Simply drape the scarf around your neck and tuck into your coat, covering the chest area left exposed by the coat's neckline. 
Well suited for any formal winter occasion, will get you the ultimate elegance and warmth accompanied with a double breasted trench coat over a slim suit.
Sporting a casual look with a muffler and a little formal one with a scarf, this must-have fashion accessory has made itself an absolute necessity than luxury.
