How to Buy the Right Running Shoes 
Choosing the right running shoes is one of the most important decisions you can make as a runner. 
Spending the time and money to get the best shoes for you will help keep you running comfortably and injury-free.
Go straight to the experts at a running specialty store. 
Plan on spending some time there because the salesperson should ask you lots of questions and have several options for you to try out.
Make sure the salesperson looks at the shape and arch to figure out what type of foot (high arches or flat feet, for example) you have. 
Determining your foot type is key to making sure you get the right running shoes.
The salesperson should also measure your foot. 
Even if you've been the same size for years, your foot length may change due to pregnancy or falling arches. Your running shoes should be 1/2 to a full size bigger than your regular shoe size because your feet will swell when you run and you need plenty of room in the toebox. 
If your toes are crammed in the front of the running shoe, you could develop blisters or black toenails.
Have the salesperson do a running analysis for you. 
He'll watch you run in the running shoes, either outside or on treadmill, and determine your running style. 
He'll observe whether you're overpronating (your foot rolls inward) or supinating (your foot rolls outward) when your foot strikes the ground.
Give the salesperson information that will help him with his running shoe recommendations. 
He should be asking you questions about what type of running you do, how often you run, where you typically run, if you're training for a race, and what type of surfaces you run on.
Run in the running shoes that the salesperson recommends for you. (Make sure you're dressed to run when you're shopping!) 
Simply trying on the shoes and walking a few steps inside the store is not enough. 
Run in each pair of shoes to test for fit, function, and comfort before making your final decision.
Test your running shoes by running in them for a week. 
If you quickly develop blisters or foot pain, they may not be the right shoes for you. 
Many specialty running stores have liberal exchange policies and allow you to return running shoes even if you've been running in them for a week or more. 
Take them back and exchange them for another recommended pair of running shoes.
After you've found your perfect running shoes, you don't have to keep going back to the specialty running shop. 
You'll need to replace your shoes every 300-400 miles. 
