How to Shoot A Family Portrait
Was it an easy sell? Convincing the family to do these creative shots?
Yes, I have to say that my family is quite spontaneous. 
My parents have a great sense of humour so although there was a little hesitation initially with where it's going to be shot and what everyone has to do, the whole family took to the idea of a family portrait quite willingly.
What were their reactions to the idea? 
Well it started with my dad suddenly wanting a family portrait, I think he saw one in his friend's house and decided that it was something we needed to do. 
One of those family milestones? But knowing what we are like, it was very hard to imagine us standing in front of a fake bookshelf with a globe in a corner looking prim and proper. 
That would have been hilarious actually, it is so not who we are. 
So I decided to come up with a concept that would best profile each individual family member but at the same time involve the entire family. 
once they saw the initial sketches they were game for it.
I heard you used a tripod to set it up- how does that work? 
It looks so professional!
It's very rudimentary actually, more so because we didn't have a big set-up and also because it was more about the concept as opposed to doing a super sophisticated fashion spread-style shoot. 
Basically we thought about what we wanted and then looked at what we had and put the two together. 
It was a mix of necessity and invention!
 We also prayed very very hard.
In terms of costume design, did the Cai family specially go shopping for their various outfits?
It helps we have a huge box of 'costumes' or clothes left over from doing other commercial projects as my other sister is a freelance stylist. 
The rest of the items are begged, borrowed and generously donated by friends and extended family. 
We've been really fortunate to have the support of friends and relatives who hear about what we are doing, shake their heads in disbelief but still go out of their way to look for random objects that we can use for the shoot. 
I try and angle the clothes around what we already wear or have but just more exaggerated in terms of colour and pattern, it is still about us after all (except maybe for the superhero outfits? lol) .
What were the steps taken to make the shoot happen.
Idea. 
Sketch. 
Recce. 
Test. 
Back to the drawing board. 
Add colour. 
Hunt for costumes and props. 
Coordinate everyone's conflicting schedules. 
Herd the family together for a trial before heading out for the shoot. 
Check equipment. 
Then pray very hard that everything goes well.
How does one try to replicate what you did?
Just make sure you make it a fun exercise and remember that the ultimate goal is that it is a family portrait, its about the family and everyone has a part to play. 
It needs to be something close to your heart if you want to make it a success. 
It takes a lot of energy and patience when you are dealing with family members and good communication is essential. 
When you are standing under the hot sun swathed in lycra with a power-ranger mask obscuring your vision and the neighbours staring you have to believe in what you are doing or it's all going to seem like a bad idea. 
Thankfully everyone had lots of fun and we look back now at the out-takes and have a good laugh.
How do you deal with family members who aren't too sold of the idea? What's the big plus point to doing this?
I have no choice but to bribe them with chocolate. 
It's easier for everyone. 
Hahah well i think that if you explain the idea carefully and take time to make sure everyone knows that this is a team effort generally you won't have too many problems.
5 tips to Great Family Portraits 
Spontaneity and willingness of the subjects (i.e. family members). 
Chocolates for the unwilling.
Sketch the idea before hand (use magazine shoot ideas if you have to), do thumbnails.
Think beyond immediate family members in terms of costumes. 
Everyone is a resource, everything can be used as a prop.
Camera, tripod and willingness to experiment with a wide variety of poses and locations.
Patience and passion to see the project through.
