How To Stay Healthy On A Cruise 
Common cruise ship illnesses -- stomach bugs or seasickness -- can ruin your vacation. 
Ship crews typically include at least one doctor, while the largest ocean liners have a full staff of doctors and nurses. 
Basic medical care is always available, as well as defibrillators and supplies to treat broken bones. 
But always bring a sufficient supply of your regular medications on any trip. 
Although not every cruise ship illness is avoidable, many are easily treatable. 
Familiarize yourself with the following five tips to avoid a cruise ship illness.
Overexposure 
The ocean magnifies the sun's rays. Protect yourself from sunburn by liberally applying sun block with a high SPF. 
A sunhat provides much needed shade on your ship's deck, while breezy long sleeves or a wrap keeps you cool but covered from the sun. 
Even when the sun is not shining brightly, UVA and UVB rays can still harm your skin and cause sunburn. 
Skin cancer is a very real risk after years of such sun exposure.
Although saltwater can be beneficial for many skin conditions, swimming pool water can be harmful. 
Chlorine dries out the skin and can worsen skin conditions such as psoriasis. 
Pre-treat dry skin with Vaseline and apply moisturizers after swimming. 
Although chlorinated pools are supposed to have low levels of bacteria, chlorine can't kill off every bug. 
Bacterial contamination in swimming pool water can cause stomach illnesses (see "Stomach Bugs" below). 
Avoid swallowing pool water -- especially in the kiddie pool!
Stomach bugs
Gastroenteritis, an ordinary stomach bug, is difficult for cruisers to avoid and is a common cruise ship illness. 
In fact, it's one of the most common diseases among travelers around the globe -- be they cruisers, fliers or drivers. 
Chances are you'll be exposed to a virus or bacteria on your dream vacation, especially if you happen to be on a ship with contaminated food or infected people. 
The basic rules of food hygiene apply: Wash your hands frequently, especially before meals; eat only food that is thoroughly cooked; and practice moderation on the buffet line.
Norovirus is a common culprit of stomach sickness. 
This hardy organism requires little growth to cause illness, resists many sanitation procedures and is transmitted easily between people. 
Other bugs such as E. coli, salmonella, staphylococcus, shigella and hepatitis are potentially serious diseases. 
Always inform your ship's doctor at the first sign of any illness. 
If you suffer from diarrhea or vomiting on your cruise, drink lots of water to stay hydrated.
Motion sickness 
Seasickness can turn a relaxing cruise on the calmest seas into an endless cycle of nausea and trips to the bathroom. 
This cruise ship illness is difficult to treat once symptoms begin. 
If you know you are prone to sea- or motion sickness, talk to your doctor before setting sail. 
A commonly used seasickness medication is scopolamine, a prescribed patch worn behind the ear that releases medication for 72 hours. Your provider may also suggest an anti-nausea medication or herbal remedy.
To keep seasickness at bay, avoid tasks that keep your head static and still, such as reading, knitting or computer work. 
If you develop nausea - the first sign of seasickness - go to an exterior deck and fix your gaze on a land-based object or the horizon. 
Lie face up if needed and keep yourself hydrated. 
Stay far from the open bar and dessert buffet table because alcohol and heavy meals can slow your acclimation to life at sea.
Respiratory illnesses 
Your cruise ship will sail into the open seas, where circulating trade winds keep the air clean and fresh. 
However, respiratory illnesses are still potentially serious risks on cruise ships. 
Influenza and Legionnaires' disease can be easily passed among people living in close, contained quarters. 
Avoid close contact with obviously ill people on your cruise and if you are sick, protect others by notifying the ship's doctor, heeding her instructions and sticking to your cabin.
Tropical diseases 
If your cruise ship calls on ports in Central or South America, Southeast Asia or the South Pacific, you might be at risk of exposure to malaria, dengue fever or yellow fever. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention keeps careful watch on disease outbreaks around the world. 
Before your trip, check the listings at the CDC for the latest news on outbreaks in your destination. 
Bring a strong bug repellent and cover-all clothing to ward off bug bites in port. 
Malaria-carrying mosquitoes are most active at dawn, dusk and night, and tend to linger near the ground. 
Always wear pants that cover your ankles. Consult with your physician about your potential risk of exposure.
