Create the Life of Your Dreams
Last night I had a terrifying nightmare.
I dreamt that I was trapped in someone else's life.
But not just anyone else's life.
I was trapped in my own life.
The one I had 5 years ago.
A life I created for myself for all the wrong reasons.
A life that made me feel empty and miserable.
Have you ever felt like that?
Waking up one day and realizing the life you're living is not really yours.
Wondering: "How did I even get here?"
Have you ever experienced that horrifying feeling of being a captive of your fears, doubts, and insecurities?
Like a straightjacket you just can't get out of.
Feeling like a prisoner in a life that you chose for yourself.
A life that nobody forced you into.
But that still feels as suffocating as prison itself.
So this nightmare I had was a "not so friendly" reminder of how we should NEVER settle for a life that's not the life of our dreams.
How we are each capable of creating our own destiny.
And how we should never stop pursuing a path that reflects who we want to be.
As scary as change is, there's nothing scarier than realizing you're wasting your life away.
Living full of regrets because you failed to follow your heart.
Because you didn't have the courage to explore beyond the ordinary. The safe. The practical. The acceptable.
Determination is all we need to cross the bridge between where we are now and where we want to be.
It means wanting it enough that we're willing to do whatever it takes to get there.
I built my own destiny when I took charge of my life and created the changes I needed: I ended a loveless "marriage" to enter into a new one that now fulfills me.
I would have never found out what real love is if I had settled for the comfort of familiar companionship.
I shifted from a successful yet unsatisfying career to one that now fills me with passion and energy.
I learned that when you follow your calling you find a sense of purpose that makes life splendid.
I changed my home and moved to a different country to start a whole new life from zero.
Learning what it's like to stand on my own feet.
Realizing how I'm much stronger than I thought I was.
Most importantly, I changed myself.
Challenging those limiting beliefs about who I thought I was.
I allowed myself the opportunity to discover who I really am. Not who I should be. But who I'm meant to be.
I was suffocating and now I feel free.
I was empty and now I feel rich.
I was lost and now I've found purpose.
So please believe me when I say, it is possible!
We are all capable of creating the life of our dreams.
A life that will empower us to blossom into who we yearn to be.
A life that will inspire us to thrive!
I wish there was one secret formula for us to go from A to Z.
A roadmap that would lead us to where we want to be.
Unfortunately, we each have to find our own way.
But if I may, let me share with you what I learned along the way.
Steps you can take to start creating the life you've been dreaming of:
Take a long, hard look at yourself
If you're lost, admit that you are.
Engage in deep self-reflection and don't give up until you find clarity.
I promise you it will come.
If you are spiritual, pray or meditate.
If you're rational, analyze yourself objectively (the help of an expert might facilitate the process).
In my case, it was after much reading, meditating, analyzing, and praying that I had my "aha" moment one random afternoon while watching the sunset in Hawaii.
It was so out of the blue, but suddenly everything became clear to me.
And through therapy, and much self-analysis, it became clearer with time.
So be ready for that moment.
Accept whatever truth you find out about yourself.
And as intimidating as it may be, don't deny it or rationalize it.
Take it all in.
Take one small step in the right direction
Realizing you have been going down the wrong path for quite a while (a lifetime maybe) can be devastating.
Especially when you've taken on responsibilities and have made life-changing choices that can't be easily reverted.
So breathe.
Don't try to change your world in a heartbeat because all you'll give yourself is a nervous breakdown.
Realize that you won't change your whole life overnight.
It will take time, patience, and perseverance.
All it takes is one small step in the direction of your dreams to get started.
For me, it was going to a bookstore that same day in Hawaii to buy the book "Psychology for Dummies".
As ridiculous as it may sound, that step was the beginning of my transformational journey.
Get ready for a lonely ride
A lesson I learned along the way is that while you change, everybody else stays the same.
So don't assume people will understand.
Or that they will support you.
I hope they do.
But if they don't, don't let it bring you down.
The people that love you most will probably try to dissuade you the most too.
Precisely because they love you.
And they'll worry about you.
But don't let their opinion drown your inner voice.
You keep doing what's right for you.
And with time, hopefully they'll understand.
And if they don't, they'll have no choice but to accept it.
A strong support system will make it feel less lonely.
But this ride will still be about you and only you. You and the world you're creating for yourself.
Embrace the idea of a fresh new start
Thinking that we have to start all over again can be unnerving.
Especially if we view all those years as wasted time.
But nothing is ever wasted.
You live, you learn.
That's just how it is.
These breakthrough experiences change us profoundly.
They teach us invaluable lessons that we wouldn't have learned otherwise.
The pain we experience helps us grow.
Plus, starting with the lightness of a clean slate is not that bad.
It gives us a second opportunity at life.
And this time, we can make decisions out of love and courage, rather than fear and insecurity.
This time we can create our own unique path.
And despite the outcome, we'll feel free and powerful in mind and spirit because we'll know that we followed our heart.
Keep walking, no matter what
I'm not going to lie to you.
It will get ugly.
No doubt about that.
But regardless of what happens, you have to keep moving forward.
There is no turning back.
And as dreadful as the road may seem, you have to believe it will get better.
It will probably get worse before it gets better, but ultimately the sun will come out again.
It will be like a dark and frightful tunnel that you'll have to go through.
Because you won't recognize anything around you. Not even yourself.
But I promise you, at the end of that tunnel, you'll find the light you've been looking for.
Realize it is a journey, not a destination
As much as I'd like to say once you're on the other side you'll be set for life, the truth is, creating the life of your dreams is a journey that will never end.
You'll have to work at it every day. The good news is, the more you work at it, the easier it'll get.
And after what will seem like an eternal transition, one day you'll realize you feel comfortable again.
And this time, not only comfortable. But happy. Truly happy. And content.
When you settle for less, you get less than what you settled for.
You become consumed by feelings of self-loathing, helplessness, and apathy.
You stop living. And start surviving.
So don't settle for a life that's not worthy of you.
You deserve so much more.