Are you living the life of your dreams?
Our family is exactly where we want to be.
There's no place in the world I would rather be right now than Lake Tahoe.
We've done our share of traveling. Vagabond journeys in a semi-nomadic state.
And we've done the yuppie thing.
We are making plans to begin an 18-month RTW (Round the World) Trip a few years from now.
I look forward to that trip. But not in a desperate sense.
Not in the sense that I wish I were there now.
I am quite happy where I am right now.
I look forward to our RTW Trip like I look forward to a changing of the seasons.
In the summer I look forward to the fall. But that doesn't mean I am not fully enjoying the summer.
Last week I was having lunch with a new friend.
I was talking about this blog, what we write about, and sort of generically asked the question, "Why don't you travel more."
She told me she did not travel more because of how little PTO she got from her employer.
PTO?
It was like she was speaking another language.
I had no idea what those letters meant.
PTO = Paid Time Off
Ok, I've got it now.
I will admit that in that moment I made a tiny little judgement.
That's not the world I live in.
I don't think about PTO.
I don't think about a boss I have to put a request in with in order to take a long weekend trip or even a month long trip.
I made this tiny little judgement about my life versus hers.
I wondered why she hadn't reached the enlightenment I had already attained.
Here was my problem.
I was judging her for not living my dream.
My dream is not her dream.
Later in the conversation she shared about a bold move she and her husband had made. They left the big city.
She took a big pay cut. Her husband was leaving a big job in the big city too.
And when they moved her husband did not even have a job at their new location.
But they had come to the point where they realized that they were never going to be happy living the life they were in. There was no amount of money they could make that would make them happy.
They wanted to live in the mountains.
They wanted an outdoor life.
They wanted to ski. They wanted to hike. They wanted to climb.
And now they are living the life of their dreams.
It's not my dream.
I don't want to think about PTO or bosses.
But it's her dream. It's their dream.
I emailed her later that day with the subject "What I love about you."
Here's what I wrote:
You quit your job and took less money.
Because you figured out that more money wasn't ever going to make you happy.
You wanted a different life.
And you went for it!
That's what I love about you!
Do you know how many people just suck it up and trudge through life?
In the blogosphere I'm friends with people from all over the world.
And I don't use that word "friend" lightly.
My friend Gabi from Israel is living a nomadic life with her family and is currently in South America.
My friend Emiel from my ancestral home of Deventer in the Netherlands is planning a 6-week "travel slow" trip through Southeast Asia in 2012.
My friend Justin is in Boston.
He and his family have decided that their goal is to travel forever and they are giving it an all-out effort in 2012 to accomplish that goal.
There's a part of me that longs to be where each of these families are in their journey.
But only in the way that I anticipate the winter while I enjoy the autumn leaves.
Where else would I want to be than Tahoe this winter?
I'll be shredding powder at Tahoe's Vail Resorts - NorthStar and Heavenly - and blogging about the life of a ski bum for the Sprint Snow Squad.
I am living the life of my dreams.
And that has been the biggest change in my life over the last year. I am no longer living the life of anyone else's expectations.
One of my goals through this blog is to help you ask yourself the tough questions about your life.
I want to make sure you realize what it is you want in life.
If you're interested in going on a journey like this with us I hope you'll reach out and connect.
I am not a guru. I have not arrived. But I am on a journey and I'm committed to helping you along on yours.