THIS OLD MAN: Life in the nineties
Check me out.
The top two knuckles of my left hand look as if I'd been worked over by the K.G.B. No, it's more as if I'd been a catcher for the Hall of Fame pitcher Candy Cummings, the inventor of the curveball, who retired from the game in 1877.
To put this another way, if I pointed that hand at you like a pistol and fired at your nose, the bullet would nail you in the left knee.
Arthritis.
Now, still facing you, if I cover my left, or better, eye with one hand, what I see is a blurry encircling version of the ceiling and floor and walls or windows to our right and left but no sign of your face or head: nothing in the middle.
But cheer up: if I reverse things and cover my right eye, there you are, back again.
If I take my hand away and look at you with both eyes, the empty hole disappears and you're in 3-D, and actually looking pretty terrific today.
Macular degeneration.
I'm ninety-three, and I'm feeling great.
Well, pretty great, unless I've forgotten to take a couple of Tylenols in the past four or five hours, in which case I've begun to feel some jagged little pains shooting down my left forearm and into the base of the thumb.
Shingles, in 1996, with resultant nerve damage.
Like many men and women my age, I get around with a couple of arterial stents that keep my heart chunking.
I also sport a minute plastic seashell that clamps shut a congenital hole in my heart, discovered in my early eighties.
The surgeon at Mass General who fixed up this PFO (a patent foramen ovale - I love to say it) was a Mexican-born character actor in beads and clogs, and a fervent admirer of Derek Jeter.
Counting this procedure and the stents, plus a passing balloon angioplasty and two or three false alarms, I've become sort of a table potato, unalarmed by the X-ray cameras swooping eerily about just above my naked body in a darkened and icy operating room; there's also a little TV screen up there that presents my heart as a pendant ragbag attached to tacky ribbons of veins and arteries.
But never mind.
Nowadays, I pop a pink beta-blocker and a white statin at breakfast, along with several lesser pills, and head off to my human-wreckage gym, and it's been a couple of years since the last showing.
My left knee is thicker but shakier than my right.
I messed it up playing football, eons ago, but can't remember what went wrong there more recently.
I had a date to have the joint replaced by a famous knee man (he's listed in the Metropolitan Opera program as a major supporter) but changed course at the last moment, opting elsewhere for injections of synthetic frog hair or rooster combs or something, which magically took away the pain.
I walk around with a cane now when outdoors - "Stop brandishing!" I hear my wife, Carol, admonishing - which gives me a nice little edge when hailing cabs.
The lower-middle sector of my spine twists and jogs like a Connecticut county road, thanks to a herniated disk seven or eight years ago.
This has cost me two or three inches of height, transforming me from Gary Cooper to Geppetto.
After days spent groaning on the floor, I received a blessed epidural, ending the ordeal.
"You can sit up now," the doctor said, whisking off his shower cap.
"Listen, do you know who Dominic Chianese is?"
"Isn't that Uncle Junior?" I said, confused.
"You know - from 'The Sopranos'?"
"Yes," he said.
"He and I play in a mandolin quartet every Wednesday night at the Hotel Edison.
Do you think you could help us get a listing in the front of The New Yorker?"
I've endured a few knocks but missed worse.
I know how lucky I am, and secretly tap wood, greet the day, and grab a sneaky pleasure from my survival at long odds.
The pains and insults are bearable.
My conversation may be full of holes and pauses, but I've learned to dispatch a private Apache scout ahead into the next sentence, the one coming up, to see if there are any vacant names or verbs in the landscape up there.
If he sends back a warning, I'll pause meaningfully, duh, until something else comes to mind.
On the other hand, I've not yet forgotten Keats or Dick Cheney or what's waiting for me at the dry cleaner's today.
As of right now, I'm not Christopher Hitchens or Tony Judt or Nora Ephron; I'm not dead and not yet mindless in a reliable upstate facility.
Decline and disaster impend, but my thoughts don't linger there.
It shouldn't surprise me if at this time next week I'm surrounded by family, gathered on short notice - they're sad and shocked but also a little pissed off to be here - to help decide, after what's happened, what's to be done with me now.
It must be this hovering knowledge, that two-ton safe swaying on a frayed rope just over my head, that makes everyone so glad to see me again.
"How great you're looking! Wow, tell me your secret!" they kindly cry when they happen upon me crossing the street or exiting a dinghy or departing an X-ray room, while the little balloon over their heads reads, "Holy shit - he's still vertical!"
Let's move on.
A smooth fox terrier of ours named Harry was full of surprises.
Wildly sociable, like others of his breed, he grew a fraction more reserved in maturity, and learned to cultivate a separate wagging acquaintance with each fresh visitor or old pal he came upon in the living room.
If friends had come for dinner, he'd arise from an evening nap and leisurely tour the table in imitation of a three-star headwaiter:
Everything O.K. here?
Is there anything we could bring you?
How was the creme brulee?
Terriers aren't water dogs, but Harry enjoyed kayaking in Maine, sitting like a figurehead between my knees for an hour or more and scoping out the passing cormorant or yachtsman.
Back in the city, he established his personality and dashing good looks on the neighborhood to the extent that a local artist executed a striking head-on portrait in pointillist oils, based on a snapshot of him she'd sneaked in Central Park.
Harry took his leave (another surprise) on a June afternoon three years ago, a few days after his eighth birthday.
Alone in our fifth- floor apartment, as was usual during working hours, he became unhinged by a noisy thunderstorm and went out a front window left a quarter open on a muggy day.
I knew him well and could summon up his feelings during the brief moments of that leap: the welcome coolness of rain on his muzzle and shoulders, the excitement of air and space around his outstretched body.
Here in my tenth decade, I can testify that the downside of great age is the room it provides for rotten news.
Living long means enough already.
When Harry died, Carol and I couldn't stop weeping; we sat in the bathroom with his retrieved body on a mat between us, the light-brown patches on his back and the near-black of his ears still darkened by the rain, and passed a Kleenex box back and forth between us.
Not all the tears were for him.
Two months earlier, a beautiful daughter of mine, my oldest child, had ended her life, and the oceanic force and mystery of that event had not left full space for tears.
Now we could cry without reserve, weep together for Harry and Callie and ourselves.
Harry cut us loose.
A few notes about age is my aim here, but a little more about loss is inevitable.
"Most of the people my age is dead. You could look it up" was the way Casey Stengel put it.
He was seventy-five at the time, and contemporary social scientists might prefer Casey's line delivered at eighty-five now, for accuracy, but the point remains.
We geezers carry about a bulging directory of dead husbands or wives, children, parents, lovers, brothers and sisters, dentists and shrinks, office sidekicks, summer neighbors, classmates, and bosses, all once entirely familiar to us and seen as part of the safe landscape of the day.
It's no wonder we're a bit bent.
The surprise, for me, is that the accruing weight of these departures doesn't bury us, and that even the pain of an almost unbearable loss gives way quite quickly to something more distant but still stubbornly gleaming.
The dead have departed, but gestures and glances and tones of voice of theirs, even scraps of clothing - that pale-yellow Saks scarf - reappear unexpectedly, along with accompanying touches of sweetness or irritation.
Our dead are almost beyond counting and we want to herd them along, pen them up somewhere in order to keep them straight.
I like to think of mine as fellow-voyagers crowded aboard the ?le de France (the idea is swiped from "Outward Bound").
Here's my father, still handsome in his tuxedo, lighting a Lucky Strike.
There's Ted Smith, about to name-drop his Gloucester home town again.
Here comes Slim Aarons.
Here's Esther Mae Counts, from fourth grade: hi, Esther Mae.
There's Gardner - with Cecille Shawn, for some reason.
Here's Ted Yates. Anna Hamburger. Colba F. Gucker, better known as Chief. Bob Ascheim. Victor Pritchett - and Dorothy. Henry Allen. Bart Giamatti.
My elder old-maid cousin Jean Webster and her unexpected, late-arriving Brit husband, Capel Hanbury.
Kitty Stableford. Dan Quisenberry. Nancy Field. Freddy Alexandre.
I look around for others and at times can almost produce someone at will.
Callie returns, via a phone call.
"Dad?"
It's her, all right, her voice affectionately rising at the end - "Da-ad?" - but sounding a bit impatient this time.
She's in a hurry.
And now Harold Eads. Toni Robin. Dick Salmon, his face bright red with laughter.
Edith Oliver. Sue Dawson. Herb Mitgang. Coop. Tudie. Elwood Carter.
These names are best kept in mind rather than boxed and put away somewhere.
Old letters are engrossing but feel historic in numbers, photo albums delightful but with a glum after-kick like a chocolate caramel.
Home movies are killers: Zeke, a long-gone Lab, alive again, rushing from right to left with a tennis ball in his mouth; my sister Nancy, stunning at seventeen, smoking a lipstick-stained cigarette aboard Astrid, with the breeze stirring her tied-up brown hair; my mother laughing and ducking out of the picture again, waving her hands in front of her face in embarrassment - she's about thirty-five.
Me sitting cross-legged under a Ping-Pong table, at eleven.
Take us away.
My list of names is banal but astounding, and it's barely a fraction, the ones that slip into view in the first minute or two.
Anyone over sixty knows this; my list is only longer.
I don't go there often, but, once I start, the battalion of the dead is on duty, alertly waiting.
Why do they sustain me so, cheer me up, remind me of life?
I don't understand this.
Why am I not endlessly grieving?
What I've come to count on is the white-coated attendant of memory, silently here again to deliver dabs from the laboratory dish of me.
In the days before Carol died, twenty months ago, she lay semiconscious in bed at home, alternating periods of faint or imperceptible breathing with deep, shuddering catch-up breaths.
Then, in a delicate gesture, she would run the pointed tip of her tongue lightly around the upper curve of her teeth.