A second life
The sun is barely up on this November morning, but already Matt Long is in a rush.
The career fireman knows the importance of moving fast: It can save a life.
Today, however, he can't seem to move quick enough.
It took 10 stressful minutes to find the disabled-athlete starting area for the ING New York City Marathon.
Until three years ago, he'd never have imagined lining up for a race alongside people who are blind or depend on crutches or sit in wheelchairs - and who will get a three-hour head start on the field.
But those three years have been packed with humbling surprises.
Long is flanked by two longtime buddies, fellow fireman Frank Carino and Noel Flynn, who works at a Manhattan hedge fund.
Carino has done an 11-hour Ironman triathlon, while Flynn is on the cusp of a sub-three-hour marathon. Still, they've agreed to hang with their friend, step by step, for a very slow run through New York City.
It could take eight or nine hours.
Long's really not sure.
All he knows is that until he finishes, his exhausting battle to restore his body, his identity, and his connections to loved ones won't be complete either.
Long wobbles over to a police barricade to stretch his legs. He adjusts his black skullcap. Then he gives his knee-high compression socks a final tug.
He hopes they'll give his battered legs some extra support.
Long's friends take note - and let him have it.
"Yo, Frank," says Flynn. "Check out Matty's legs."
"Very nice, Matty," says Carino. "Ya look like Paula Radcliffe."
For a while, Long joins in as the jokes fly, but he has other things on his mind.
The fast-talking, hard-charging fireman is about to run the slowest race of his life, and even if he finishes, he's surely going to suffer.
He paces around like his life depends on what happens over the next 26 miles.
And maybe it does.
On December 22, 2005, New York City woke up to 28??F temperatures and day three of a transit strike.
For 48 hours, the 33,000-person Transport Workers Union had violated a state law prohibiting city employees from staging a job action.
Union and city negotiators kept bargaining, but no settlement was in sight.
The strike forced New Yorkers to find new ways to get around.
Matt Long was among them.
That morning around 5:30, the 12-year veteran of the New York City Fire Department left his apartment on East 48th Street on his road bike, wearing a ski mask and a red and silver jacket over a winter biking kit. He had a 20-minute ride ahead of him, to the Rock on Randall's Island.
The Rock is shorthand for the FDNY's training academy.
It's where probation officers go to see if they can make it onto the nation's largest fire-fighting department.
The Rock resembles a Hollywood back lot, 22 acres dotted with faux walk-ups and high-rises.
For six months, probies haul hoses up and down stairs with up to 100 pounds on their backs.
They crawl through dark tunnels while breathing through oxygen masks.
They do whatever they're told so they're ready when a fire alarm goes off.
It was the next-to-last day of Long's yearlong assignment with the academy's health and fitness squad. His job was to ensure probies were physically prepared to graduate and save lives.
He was planning to take a week of vacation, then return to his permanent job at Engine Company 53, Ladder 43, in East Harlem.
Long, 39 at the time, fit in perfectly at the Rock.
He was relentlessly upbeat and radiated strength.
He came from blue-collar Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, and a family with eight siblings.
He had two brothers in the FDNY.
Long had worked amid the chaos at Ground Zero on 9/11.
And he had a "save" to his credit.
On Christmas Eve 2000, his company responded to a fire in a tenement that was thought to be abandoned.
But while putting out the fire, Long saw a stack of mail in front of one apartment. So, he entered the unit and found an elderly man unconscious on the floor.
With another firefighter's help, he dragged the man to safety.
While at the Rock, Long worked himself into the best shape of his life.
He had only been biking and running seriously for a year and a half; he got into the sports when he was having back pain and a doctor urged him to lose some of the 212 pounds he was carrying on his 5'11" frame.
Within a few months, he was down 30 pounds, over the back pain, and suddenly addicted to triathlons.
In fact, he competed in more than 20 events of various distances over an 18-month span.
"The adrenaline rush - I loved it," he says. "It was like rushing to a fire.
I was hooked."
So it was little surprise Long would attempt - and finish - his first Ironman triathlon, a 2.4-mile swim, 112-mile bike, and 26.2-mile run, in Lake Placid, New York, in July 2005.
He finished in 11 hours and 18 minutes, placing in the top 20 percent for his age group and running the marathon leg in 3:44:38.
Next, Long set his sights on the 2005 New York City Marathon.
But not just to run it. He wanted to go 3:15 and qualify for Boston.
In August, Long began running workdays at 6 a.m. with three trainers at the Rock: Tommy Grimshaw, Shane McKeon, and Larry Parker.
No day was a gimme.
On Mondays and Wednesdays they ran 12 miles, pushing eight of those at a 6:15 clip.
Tuesdays and Thursdays were easy eight-milers.
And Friday was an 18-miler, with miles four to 12 at a six-minute pace.
At first, Long couldn't keep up.
"But after a month, Matty wasn't far behind us.
Pretty soon he was sticking with us," says McKeon. "We pushed each other; our goal was for all of us to qualify for Boston."
As it turned out, all four made it.
Long went 3:13:59, good enough to place fourth among the 201 New York firefighters who ran.
They'd start ramping up for Boston right after New Year's.
Today, on this frigid morning, three days before Christmas, a light swim was in store.
McKeon, Grimshaw, and Parker waited at the Rock as Matt Long started to cycle up Third Avenue.
"Hey, how did we do with that first mile?"
"Around 17:30.
That work for you, Matt?"
"Yeah, pretty close to what I expected."
By now Long, Carino, and Flynn are halfway across the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.
To their left, Manhattan's skyline is backlit in light blue.
In front of them, there's nothing but the metal skyway.
The other early starters are out of sight, having rushed off on crutches and in chairs.
When Long ran here in 2005, he did the first mile in an easy 7:40.
Today he stutters across the span, his brawny shoulders listing and lurching side to side.
As he pushes off his left leg, the one filled with titanium, the three grossly distorted hammer toes on his left foot jab into the ground.
His right leg, two inches shorter than his left, follows in a contorted motion, barely bending as he forces his foot forward.
Each step consumes inches, not feet.
The bus moved up Third Avenue, two lanes over from the shoulder where Matt Long and his bike were gaining speed.
It wasn't a typical city bus. A brokerage firm, Bear Stearns, had hired the coach to transport employees to work during the transit strike.
The driver was from Albany, so maybe he didn't know that making turns outside of the marked bus lane was prohibited by law.
Or perhaps he just didn't see the biker.
Whatever the reason, the bus started turning right onto 52nd Street - and right into Matt Long.
Later, one cop at the scene would wonder why the biker didn't ricochet backward on impact. That's what typically happens in a collision like this.
But when Long crashed into the bus, he got vacuumed underneath.
By the time the bus came to a stop, Long and his bike were twisted near the rear axle.
The bike's handlebars got jammed into the coach's metal base and speared Long, opening a fissure from his belly button to his rectum.
Blood slid from under the vehicle and began pooling near the corner.
A police officer happened to be nearby and called for backup.
The NYPD's Emergency Service Unit arrived four minutes later.
One detective, Charles King, went to work lifting the front of the bus with a hydraulic jack, while two others, Ralph Logan and Charlie Raz, crawled under.
They heard Long moan, "so we knew he was alive," recalls Logan.
They yelled out for a portable saw so they could cut the handlebars from the bus and Long's stomach.
But because of the blood gushing from Long's midsection, "it was like an oil slick under there," Logan says. "I had to wedge my feet up on the bottom of the bus to keep from sliding."
As the officers sawed, firefighters from a midtown station arrived.
One of them, Donal Buckley, crawled under the bus to help.
He grabbed the bike frame, steadying it as officers kept sawing.
It took a couple of minutes for the officers to free Long.
They rolled him onto a backboard, pushed him from under the bus, and lifted him onto a gurney.
At that point, Long was drifting in and out of consciousness, though he managed to mouth the word forty.
Buckley looked at his face; it was pasty white but familiar.
He remembered a fireman who used to park his car in front of his firehouse to run in nearby Central Park.
"Hey," Buckley blurted. "That's Matty Long, from Ladder 43."
As Long, Carino, and Flynn stutter down the ramp off the Verrazano and start looping into Brooklyn, Long says, "I used to come out every year and watch this race.
Never missed it."
Bay Ridge is the first neighborhood runners hit after the bridge. Long's family moved there when he was a teenager.
In a few hours, locals will line Fourth Avenue, cheering on a sea of marathoners.
But now, the street is practically empty except for a clump of about 40 people waiting in front of Our Lady of Angels Church near the three-mile mark.
It's Long's family and friends.
Matt told his mom and dad that he'd stop for exactly 90 seconds - enough time for them to snap a few pictures.
The noise grows until Long shuffles to a stop in front of his parents, and hugs them.
His two sisters, Maureen and Eileen, hold their kids, and cry.
Some of his brothers and nephews hold signs that say "Matty, We Love You" and "Matty, You Will."
The 90 seconds pass quickly.
Long tells his family he has to go.
A block later, he turns to his left. He's tearing up.
"Hey, Frank."
"Yeah, Matt."
"The allergies, bro. They're starting to kick in."
"Take it slow, bro. Take it slow."
Most mornings, Dr. Soumitra R. Eachempati, a trauma surgeon at New York-Presbyterian Hospital on Manhattan's Upper East Side, walks to work from his nearby apartment.
On this day, however, he walked a bit faster after getting a call from the ER about a biker who'd been carved open by a bus.
Orthopedic surgeon Dr. Dean Lorich had a trickier commute. He lives 20 blocks from the hospital.
Because of the transit strike, police were restricting cars or taxis with fewer than four passengers. So to get to work that day, Lorich had to fill a cab with his pregnant wife and two young daughters.