NOW WE ARE FIVE
In late May of this year, a few weeks shy of her fiftieth birthday, my youngest sister, Tiffany, committed suicide.
She was living in a room in a beat-up house on the hard side of Somerville, Massachusetts, and had been dead, the coroner guessed, for at least five days before her door was battered down.
I was given the news over a white courtesy phone while at the Dallas airport.
Then, because my plane to Baton Rouge was boarding and I wasn't sure what else to do, I got on it.
The following morning, I boarded another plane, this one to Atlanta, and the day after that I flew to Nashville, thinking all the while about my ever-shrinking family.
A person expects his parents to die. But a sibling?
I felt I'd lost the identity I'd enjoyed since 1968, when my younger brother was born.
"Six kids!" people would say. "How do your poor folks manage?"
There were a lot of big families in the neighborhood I grew up in. Every other house was a fiefdom, so I never gave it much thought until I became an adult, and my friends started having children.
One or two seemed reasonable, but anything beyond that struck me as outrageous.
A couple Hugh and I knew in Normandy would occasionally come to dinner with their wrecking crew of three, and when they'd leave, several hours later, every last part of me would feel violated.
Take those kids, double them, and subtract the cable TV: that's what my parents had to deal with.
Now, though, there weren't six, only five.
"And you can't really say, 'Thereused to be six,' " I told my sister Lisa. "It just makes people uncomfortable."
I recalled a father and son I'd met in California a few years back. "So are there other children?" I asked.
"There are," the man said. "Three who are living and a daughter, Chloe, who died before she was born, eighteen years ago."
That's not fair, I remember thinking.
Because, I mean, what's a person supposed to do with that?
Compared with most forty-nine-year-olds, or even most forty-nine-month-olds, Tiffany didn't have much.
She did leave a will, though. In it, she decreed that we, her family, could not have her body or attend her memorial service.
"So put that in your pipe and smoke it," our mother would have said.
A few days after getting the news, my sister Amy drove to Somerville with a friend and collected two boxes of things from Tiffany's room: family photographs, many of which had been ripped into pieces, comment cards from a neighborhood grocery store, notebooks, receipts.
The bed, a mattress on the floor, had been taken away and a large industrial fan had been set up.
Amy snapped some pictures while she was there, and, individually and in groups, those of us left studied them for clues: a paper plate on a dresser that had several drawers missing, a phone number written on a wall, a collection of mop handles, each one a different color, arranged like cattails in a barrel painted green.
Six months before our sister killed herself, I made plans for us all to gather at a beach house on Emerald Isle, off the coast of North Carolina.
My family used to vacation there every summer, but after my mother died we stopped going, not because we lost interest but because it was she who always made the arrangements and, more important, paid for it.
The place I found with the help of my sister-in-law, Kathy, had six bedrooms and a small swimming pool.
Our weeklong rental period began on Saturday, June 8th, and we arrived to find a delivery woman standing in the driveway with seven pounds of seafood, a sympathy gift sent by friends.
"They's slaw in there, too," she said, handing over the bags.
In the past, when my family rented a cottage my sisters and I would crowd the door like puppies around a food dish. Our father would unlock it, and we'd tear through the house claiming rooms.
I always picked the biggest one facing the ocean, and, just as I'd start to unpack, my parents would enter and tell me that this was theirs.
"I mean, just who the hell do you think you are?" my father would ask.
He and my mother would move in, and I would get booted to what was called "the maid's room."
It was always on the ground level, a kind of dank shed next to where the car was parked.
There was never an interior stairway leading to the upper floor. Instead, I had to take the outside steps and, more often than not, knock on the locked front door, like a beggar hoping to be invited in.
"What do you want?" my sisters would ask.
"I want to come inside."
"That's funny," Lisa, the eldest, would say to the others, who were gathered like disciples around her.
"Did you hear something, a little whining sound? What is it that makes a noise like that? A hermit crab? A little sea slug?"
Normally, there was a social divide between the three eldest and the three youngest children in my family.
Lisa, Gretchen, and I treated the others like servants and did very well for ourselves.
At the beach, though, all bets were off, and it was just upstairs against downstairs, meaning everyone against me.
This time, because I was paying, I got to choose the best room.
Amy moved in next door, and my brother, Paul, his wife, and their ten-year-old daughter, Maddy, took the spot next to her.
That was it for oceanfront.
The others arrived later and had to take the leftovers.
Lisa's room faced the street, as did my father's.
Gretchen's faced the street and was intended for someone who was paralyzed. Hanging from the ceiling were electric pulleys designed to lift a harnessed body into and out of bed.
Unlike the cottages of our youth, this one did not have a maid's room.
It was too new and fancy for that, as were the homes that surrounded it.
Traditionally, all the island houses were on stilts, but more and more often now the ground floors are filled in.
They all have beachy names and are painted beachy colors, but most of those built after Hurricane Fran hit the coast, in 1996, are three stories tall and look almost suburban.
This place was vast and airy. The kitchen table sat twelve, and there was not one but two dishwashers.
All the pictures were ocean-related: seascapes and lighthouses, all with the airborne "V"s that are shorthand for seagull.
A sampler on the living-room wall read, "Old Shellers Never Die, They Simply Conch Out."
On the round clock beside it, the numbers lay in an indecipherable heap, as if they'd come unglued.
Just above them were printed the words "Who cares?"
This was what we found ourselves saying whenever anyone asked the time.
"Who cares?"
The day before we arrived at the beach, Tiffany's obituary ran in the Raleigh News & Observer.
It was submitted by Gretchen, who stated that our sister had passed away peacefully at her home.
This made it sound as if she were very old, and had a house.
But what else could you do?
People were leaving responses on the paper's Web site, and one fellow wrote that Tiffany used to come into the video store where he worked in Somerville. When his glasses broke, she offered him a pair she had found while foraging for art supplies in somebody's trash can.
He said that she also gave him a Playboy magazine from the nineteen-sixties that included a photo spread titled "The Ass Menagerie."
This was fascinating, as we didn't really know our sister very well.
Each of us had pulled away from the family at some point in our lives--we'd had to in order to forge our own identities, to go from being a Sedaris to being our own specific Sedaris.
Tiffany, though, stayed away.
She might promise to come home for Christmas, but at the last minute there'd always be some excuse: she missed her plane, she had to work.
The same would happen with our summer vacations.
"The rest of us managed to make it," I'd say, aware of how old and guilt-trippy I sounded.
All of us would be disappointed, though for different reasons.
Even if you weren't getting along with Tiffany at the time, you couldn't deny the show she put on--the dramatic entrances, the non-stop, professional-grade insults, the chaos she'd inevitably leave in her wake.
One day she'd throw a dish at you and the next she'd create a stunning mosaic made of the shards. When allegiances with one brother or sister flamed out, she'd take up with someone else.
At no time did she get along with everybody, but there was always someone she was in contact with.
Toward the end, it was Lisa, but before that we'd all had our turn.
The last time she joined us on Emerald Isle was in 1986.
"And, even then, she left after three days," Gretchen reminded us.
As kids, we spent our beach time swimming. Then we became teenagers and devoted ourselves to tanning.
There's a certain kind of talk that takes place when you're lying, dazed, in the sun, and I've always been partial to it.
On the first afternoon of our most recent trip, we laid out one of the bedspreads we had as children, and arranged ourselves side by side on it, trading stories about Tiffany.
"What about the Halloween she spent on that Army base?"
"And the time she showed up at Dad's birthday party with a black eye?"
"I remember this girl she met years ago at a party," I began, when my turn came. "She'd been talking about facial scars, and how terrible it would be to have one, so Tiffany said, 'I have a little scar on my face and I don't think it's so awful.'
" 'Well,' the girl said, 'you would if you were pretty.' "
Amy laughed and rolled over onto her stomach. "Oh, that's a good line!"
I rearranged the towel I was using as a pillow. "Isn't it, though?"
Coming from someone else, the story might have been upsetting, but not being pretty was never one of Tiffany's problems, especially when she was in her twenties and thirties, and men tumbled helpless before her.
"Funny," I said, "but I don't remember a scar on her face."
I stayed in the sun too long that day and got a burn on my forehead.
That was basically it for me and the beach blanket.
I made brief appearances for the rest of the week, stopping to dry off after a swim, but mainly I spent my days on a bike, cycling up and down the coast, and thinking about what had happened.
While the rest of us seem to get along effortlessly, with Tiffany it always felt like work.
She and I usually made up after arguing, but our last fight took it out of me, and at the time of her death we hadn't spoken in eight years.
During that period, I regularly found myself near Somerville, and though I'd always toy with the idea of contacting her and spending a few hours together, I never did, despite my father's encouragement.
Meanwhile, I'd get reports from him and Lisa: Tiffany had lost her apartment, had gone on disability, had moved into a room found for her by a social-service agency.
Perhaps she was more forthcoming with her friends, but her family got things only in bits and pieces.