Getting Married and Staying Married
"Any advice for those of us who are new at marriage?" asked a former student, a young woman whose wedding we attended last year. She was responding to a Facebook post where I'd shameless hoisted up a picture of my husband and myself celebrating our 23rd anniversary.
Like many of the other young people we love-- people sculpted by the world, by their own intelligence, and by their own sensitivity into choosing excellent partners--it was an honor to be at their beautiful and festive wedding.
And I think she's wise to ask for advice.
The first years are tough.
Time passes faster as you get older; we call it the "Time Doppler Effect" in our family since the time is already gone by the time you even notice it.
So my husband and I have been married for 23 years and we're still laughing every day--often at each other and always at the world.
But what is there to say on the occasion of a first wedding anniversary?
Well, to start off with, the bridal catalogs and etiquette books get it TOTALLY wrong when it comes to designating what to give couples as gifts for their various anniversaries.
My little booklet from the card store (an absolutely authoritative text) offers the following schedule: the first year, you're supposed to give paper for a present; after ten years, tin; after fifty-years, gold; after seventy-five years, diamonds.
As you can already see, this sequence is badly designed.
Frankly, if a couple can make it through the first year of marriage still more or less liking one another, they deserve more than stationary. Two people must have prodigious amounts of strength and courage to make it through the first year of marriage, not to mention tolerance, tenderness, and a tremendous sense of humor.
Paper just doesn't cut it.
All anniversaries should be celebrated with gusto--with brass bands and parades.
We should let couples know we give them credit for having made it through the field of landmines waiting for almost all unsuspecting lovers when they risk the marital journey.
Don't get me wrong--I'm not warning folks away from weddings.
I am delighted to be married to my husband and consider our marriage to be one of the best parts of my life.
But the first twelve-month stretch of our lives together felt like one of the hardest, oh, hundred years of my life.
I know my husband felt the same way.
Good marriages are hard work.
What's tough about the first year?
Realizing that THIS IS IT, OHMYGOD, I'M GOING TO BE WITH THIS PERSON FOR THE REST OF MY LIFE! Think about how many different ways that can be said or thought--you could use that one sentence alone as an audition piece for a Broadway show because, depending on your tone and expression, it can convey ecstasy or despair.
You can say it when thinking "Amazing.
I feel relaxed as soon as I walk in the door.
I finally feel, now that I am with my partner, as if I am really and truly home.
Never before has any other person helped me believe in myself so fully or helped me become myself so entirely as this miraculous individual."
Or you can say it when thinking, "I can't even breathe normally anymore for fear that I'll be observed and notes will be taken.
I can't believe the number of compromises and adjustments I've already made just in the small amount of time we've been together and that I will have to continue making until the end of time.
I can never be myself again."
And I suspect that both interpretations get rehearsed often within the first year of marriage.
Ceremonies change things; after all, that's why ceremonies exist.
A wedding transforms a relationship.
Even couples that have lived together for years discover newness once they are officially married--sort of like getting a favorite pair of shoes resoled.
It's the same comfortable fit, but there is a fundamental difference--a difference sought out and designed but one that makes it feel, well, different (even if it feels better).
Don't be surprised.
So here's a toast to those who are recently wed and to those who have simply (ha--as if it were simple!) remained married: May you always want to come home to each other and make a home within one another. May every year fill your lives with laughter, knowledge, awareness, and understanding; may every year become smoother and better than the one before; may every year be golden and glittering because of the richness of your life together.
And to those of us who have been married 23 years or more? Here's to true love.