Thanksgiving story: A 'Lost Boy' and the kindness of strangers
JACKSONVILLE, FLA.; AND WALTHAM, MASS. ÿ As he arrived, at last, to the names that began with "T," University of Florida President Bernie Machen paused while reading the list of 2008 graduates.
There was, he told the huge crowd gathered at the O'Connell Center, a particular student he wanted to stop and honor.
This student, Dr. Machen told the 8,500-some graduates and their families, had learned to read and write by tracing letters in the dirt in a Kenyan refugee camp.
He had arrived as a teenager with nothing, put himself through school, and had, against all odds, studied his way into the hearts and minds of Gator Nation.
He asked Peter Ter to rise.
And as the lanky Sudanese man stood in a sea of black mortarboards, Machen turned his attention to the upper seats.
"Could Peter's family also stand?" he asked.
There, for all to see on the Jumbotron, stood Mr. Ter's "family": a motley collection of unrelated white Southerners ÿ a dentist, a schoolteacher, a professor, and others ÿ waving eagerly at the young man below.
Fourteen thousand people stood and applauded.
And Ter ÿ who just a few years earlier had never seen a movie or even a light switch, and who years before had wondered whether he would live or die in one of the world's most heartbreaking exoduses ever created by war ÿ looked around and smiled shyly.
He walked in his easy, deferential stride up to the stage.
And then the "Lost Boy" ÿ the title given to Ter and the other children from southern Sudan who wandered for years after being violently separated from their families ÿ turned to the crowd and grinned, and extended two long arms in the Gator Chomp.
"Everyone just went crazy," recalls Daniel Schellhase, a Jacksonville dentist and one of those members of Ter's "family," who breaks into a broad, almost bewildered smile at the memory.
The scene was a perfect example of what many scholars would insist is an increasingly scientifically recognized fact about the human condition: People reach out to others, and often do so across great cultural, economic, and philosophical divides.
Ter is the first to point out that his story is only partially about him, and equally about the many friends and "family" members who have adopted him ÿ and whom he has adopted ÿ throughout his unlikely global odyssey, from northwest Kenya to sunny Florida to the cold mountains of Azerbaijan and back to academia in Boston.
It is a story of kindness.
And it is the story, in its elemental sense, of thanksgiving.
"Being strong is a part of my nature," Ter said in one of several Monitor interviews during the past year.
"Being able to learn without being held back by all of the bad things.
But I am talking with you today because people I didn't know helped me survive."
Ter was tending cattle outside his village the day the planes came.
This job was a common one for young boys in the agriculturally rich Unity State of what is now South Sudan; little Peter was probably about 3 years old, but he had been going to the cattle camps for most of his short life ÿ riding on his father's shoulders, or carried by an older brother who would plop him down on the grass if it was time to wrestle or play with the other kids.
The young children stayed with the calves while the men moved their herds toward the river, or to new pastures.
The women were in the village, or maybe nearby fields.
Ter's family ÿ his parents and their nine children ÿ were not educated, but they never went hungry.
This section of Sudan was a breadbasket, which was part of the reason for the brutal, complicated civil war that raged from 1983 to 2005 between the southern, Christian part of the country and the more politically powerful North, which was Muslim and less endowed with natural resources.
By the time the war came to Ter's village, Nyandong, in the county of Payinjiar, the North had already begun a bombing campaign targeting the South, dropping explosives over communities and cattle camps and killing as many people and animals as possible in an effort to crush the emerging Sudan People's Liberation Army.
The children heard the rumbling of the military jets, and looked up to see the bombers swooping toward them.
Through his child's eyes, Ter remembers running and chaos.
But there was kindness even among the bombs.
Someone ÿ he doesn't remember who ÿ grabbed his hand and pulled him to safety.
Ter was separated from his parents; it would be years before he discovered whether they lived or died that day.
He eventually also lost track of his siblings, some of whom were taken and pressed into service as child soldiers.
But those anonymous hands, grasping to pull the young child to safety, reached out to him again and again.
"I had people who would grab me by the hand and run because they didn't want me to die," Ter says.
The built-in inclination to sacrifice for others
For centuries, social theorists have explained human behavior largely through a rather grim lens.
People, according to these generations of scientists and philosophers, are inherently violent and territorial, inclined to protect their own kin, kill off competitors, and take as many riches for themselves as possible.
But in the past few years, scholars in fields ranging from psychology to sociology, economics to biology, have produced a groundswell of research bolstering an alternative perspective.
Central to human existence, they have found, is a complex, snowballing mix of what researchers often call "prosociality" ÿ a mix of empathy and gratitude, kindness and love, altruism and cooperation; all those qualities that were on display at Ter's graduation ceremony at the University of Florida arena, as well as back on that day he lost his family.
Some recent studies, for instance, have identified altruistic tendencies among primates and human babies under 3 months of age.
Others show that perceived distress in others triggers caregiving behavior.
"Public good" experiments, in which people must decide whether to share or keep resources, show that the initial human inclination is to give, while other new research reveals that people report more happiness when they spend on others than when they spend on themselves.
"The science of altruism has moved way beyond the old debate of does it exist or not," says psychology Prof. Dacher Keltner, who directs the Greater Good Science Center at the University of California, Berkeley.
"Now we're thinking about all the various motivations for why people sacrifice on behalf of other people and non-kin ÿ pretty routinely."
In other words, the experts would like to explain the remarkable story of Peter Ter.
Humbled by a benefactor's generosity
With a growing group of children also separated from their families, eventually numbering into the thousands, Ter walked for months toward a refugee camp in Ethiopia.
Then, when those camps were attacked, they trekked 1,000 miles back through Sudan toward Kenya.
He remembers gunfire and bodies.
The horrors of the 20,000-some Lost Boys of Sudan ÿ and a large number of Lost Girls ÿ has been well documented.
Throughout their migrations, the children hid in the bush, became the prey of lions and soldiers and starvation, walked until their feet bled, and passed through a nightmare of shelled villages and corpses.
Thousands died, according to the United Nations.
Ter, for his part, is matter-of-fact, but shies away from discussing details of the ordeal.
The memories still wake him up at night, he admits.
But then, he says with a smile, he just gets up and turns on National Public Radio.
It soothes him.
"I love NPR," he says. " 'All Things Considered' ÿ that is my favorite phrase."
This buoyant attitude today is a hint of what helped him survive his childhood in the UN's sprawling, barren Kakuma Refugee Camp in northwest Kenya.
When the survivors arrived, they were called the "minors."
Overwhelmed aid workers tried to quickly arrange basic schooling, as well as one meal a day.
But the children were generally left to fend for themselves.
Ter promised himself he would become literate.
He taught himself English by reading the Bible.
He learned to write by tracing English letters in the dirt.
Crime and disease were rampant in the camp.
But there was also generosity.
A young man about a decade older than Ter, named James Thak Dhiel, came from the same county in Unity State and took a particular interest in the skinny younger boy who was so often studying.
Mr. Dhiel knew that Ter left for school in the morning without eating, and came home in the evening dizzy with hunger, so he regularly slipped the boy a shilling or two to buy extra food.
He soon took a big brother role in Ter's life, Ter recalls, inviting the younger boy to stay in his compound of thatched-roof homes built with materials provided by the UN.
He kept an eye out for the bandits and corrupt soldiers who regularly preyed on the younger camp residents.
"I will always be so humbled thinking of him," says Ter, who has lost touch with Dhiel but knows the man was relocated to Australia in 2002.
"There is always humanity.
Everywhere people will give, regardless of whether they have anything."
People are also quite adept at quickly identifying who is likely to be trustworthy and "prosocial" in their own right, and are more likely to help those perceived to be empathetic and altruistic themselves, according to recent studies.
Perhaps this is why Dhiel reached out to Ter. Or perhaps he simply saw a child struggling, one that maybe reminded him of relatives from home who were long gone, or by this point trapped as child soldiers.
Ter says he never asked Dhiel about what happened to his family.
In the camps, there are some subjects too painful to discuss.
Almost nine years after he had arrived at Kakuma, Ter was given refugee status by the US government.
When that day came to say farewell to Ter, who would soon be flying across the ocean to a place called Florida, Dhiel took him to a market and had him fitted for a new outfit.
Dhiel also offered the younger boy a special present: a pair of orange and blue shorts, discovered at one of the used-clothing stands that dotted the camp, emblazoned with the word "Florida," along with a picture of what Peter identified as a crocodile.
"I was a Gator when I was still in Kenya," Ter says with a grin.
'You don't look like you're from around here!'
Adam Lohse remembers the phone call during the fall of 2001 from his friend Meg Young.
She had run into these Sudanese guys at the grocery store, she said, and she was going to have a party for them.
She wanted Mr. Lohse to be there ÿ after all, he was a fellow churchgoer, interested in missionary work, and here were people around their own age, in their own backyard, who certainly needed a welcome.
That was just like Ms. Young, Lohse had thought with a smile, to just go up to a bunch of people at the Publix supermarket and say "Hey, you don't look like you're from around here!"
But he was pleased.
Jacksonville was a growing destination for refugees from around the world; it was God's work to reach out to these people.
In a 2003 University of Chicago report titled "Altruism in Contemporary America," University of Chicago researcher Tom Smith analyzed survey data for trends about empathy and altruistic behavior and constructed scales that measured the various levels of this prosocial behavior for different demographics.
Although nonreligious people were regularly altruistic, overall data showed that those who consider themselves religious ÿ particularly those who engage in practices that identify them as devoutly religious ÿ were more likely to engage in altruistic behavior.