Facing the Enemies Within
We are not born with courage, but neither are we born with fear.
Maybe some of our fears are brought on by your own experiences, by what someone has told you, by what you've read in the papers.
Some fears are valid, like walking alone in a bad part of town at two o'clock in the morning.
But once you learn to avoid that situation, you won't need to live in fear of it.
Fears, even the most basic ones, can totally destroy our ambitions.
Fear can destroy fortunes.
Fear can destroy relationships.
Fear, if left unchecked, can destroy our lives.
Fear is one of the many enemies lurking inside us.
Let me tell you about five of the other enemies we face from within.
The first enemy that you've got to destroy before it destroys you is indifference.
What a tragic disease this is.
"Ho-hum, let it slide. I'll just drift along."
Here's one problem with drifting: you can't drift your way to the top of the mountain.
The second enemy we face is indecision.
Indecision is the thief of opportunity and enterprise.
It will steal your chances for a better future.
Take a sword to this enemy.
The third enemy inside is doubt.
Sure, there's room for healthy skepticism.
You can't believe everything.
But you also can't let doubt take over.
Many people doubt the past, doubt the future, doubt each other, doubt the government, doubt the possibilities and doubt the opportunities.
Worse of all, they doubt themselves.
I'm telling you, doubt will destroy your life and your chances of success.
It will empty both your bank account and your heart.
Doubt is an enemy. Go after it. Get rid of it.
The fourth enemy within is worry.
We've all got to worry some. Just don't let it conquer you.
Instead, let it alarm you.
Worry can be useful.
If you step off the curb in New York City and a taxi is coming, you've got to worry.
But you can't let worry loose like a mad dog that drives you into a small corner.
Here's what you've got to do with your worries: drive them into a small corner.
Whatever is out to get you, you've got to get it.
Whatever is pushing on you, you've got to push back.
The fifth interior enemy is over-caution.
It is the timid approach to life.
Timidity is not a virtue; it's an illness.