Changes of women's bodies during pregnancy
When you see a pregnant lady, all that you can see is her rotund belly and a few added pounds everywhere. 
But there's more to it than meets the eye. 
Here's what goes on in a woman's body through each month of the pregnancy.
Month 1:
In all likelihood, women may not show or feel any symptoms. 
However, some women feel incredibly sleepy. 
Breasts might become tender and slightly larger by the fourth week. 
A heightened sense of smell is also one symptom. Women might notice that aromas that were hitherto pleasant cause gagging. Your favourite foods' smell might seem repulsive.
Month 2:
You might put on a little weight around the hips. 
A tiny bump may form around the stomach and waistline may increase. 
However, there might not be any noticeable weight gain. 
Although you might not yet know that you are pregnant, the umbilical cord is forming. This can be tiring for you. 
The texture of hair and skin change. 
Fine hair may become thick and shine or hair might even break and thin out. Skin might become flawless, free of blemishes and start glowing or you may develop acne problems. 
By the end of the second month, the levels of progesterone and estrogen hormone in the body are almost four times the normal level. This may lead to major mood swings as also food cravings and aversions.
Month 3:
There could be nasal congestion and problems of a stuffy nose. A lot of blood is being pumped through the body, which means that the heart has to work doubly harder which also means that your energy levels might be at an all time low.
Month 4:
Generally, women tend to feel much better in the second trimester than they did in their first. However, since each person is different so's their body's reaction. 
The thin line of fine hair that runs from the navel to the pubic bone becomes darker due to hormonal changes. 
You might experience pain in the abdominal muscles because of it stretching to accommodate the baby.
Month 5:
This can be the most enjoyable month for both the parents as the mother has adjusted to the hormonal changes in the body.
The mother's weight is not overwhelming as yet and she can feel the baby moving. 
However, an increase in the volume of blood can make the mother feel light-headed. 
Women must avoid resting on their backs. 
Rest well or you might develop varicose veins. 
The skin on your belly is stretching. This might lead to tightening and itching. 
Use a good moisturiser that has vitamin E. to moisturise your skin.
Month 6:
The aerola (dark circles around the nipples) will get larger and darker. 
Breasts grow larger consistently. It is likely that colostrum (a yellowish liquid) might leak from the breasts. The Montgomery glands (li'l pimples around the aerola) will become enlarged. 
Blood pressure might drop in the second trimester but will return to normalcy in the third trimester.
Month 7:
As the baby grows bigger, the digestive tract, lungs and liver are pushed upward. This might lead to bouts of indigestion or constipation as well as breathlessness. 
You need to watch what you eat. 
You will also feel the urge to pee more often because of the pressure on your urinary tract.
Month 8:
There will be a strain on your back leading to severe back pain. 
You may not be able to sleep properly because of the need to pee often. This could make you snappish. 
Try to remain calm. 
Hands and feet might swell.
Month 9:
Braxton Hicks or false alarms occur regularly in this month. 
As the baby has grown to its fullest size by now, the stomach, liver, lungs, pelvic bowl are all cramped up against the diaphragm. This might be discomforting but you must be patient.
Pregnancy can be overwhelming for some as there are massive physical changes in the body alongwith hormonal changes that affect not only the body but your emotional state as well. However, the key is to be calm and composed and deal with it.
"Women feel nauseous, uneasy and lethargic. They might have terrible mood swings. They may keep crying incessantly, might feel depressed for no reason at all. 
You might also feel bloated. 
A 42-year-old patient came to me suspecting she had fibroids since her stomach had bloated considerably. 
She was six months pregnant and she was unaware of this as she thought her missed periods meant she had hit menopause. 
Another patient, who had tried a multitude of fertility treatments and failed, thus, finally adopted a baby girl. 
She developed back problems all of a sudden and was bed-ridden. 
She was under the impression that her bloated tummy was a result of this lack of activity. 
However, on getting an ultrasound done, we found out she was seven months pregnant."
Dr Bindu Balani, MD, Gynaecologist
A nervous hysterical wreck is an absolutely normal pregnant woman. She will have weird mood swings and food cravings and will drive everyone crazy but that's a perfectly normal pregnant woman. 
A lot of women do not realise that they are pregnant. 
I had a patient who was undergoing treatment for infertility. 
When she missed her period, she thought it was stress induced. 
Its only when she came to me did she realise that she was into her third month of pregnancy. 
Generally, women lose around two and a half kilos during the first trimester since they tend to throw up a lot. 
They gain weight (upto 10 to 12 kilos) in their second and third trimester. 
We advice obese women to keep their weight gain down to five-six kilos only since they run a risk of developing problems like high blood pressure etc."
Dr Amita Soni