The saddle saga: saddling up and setting off
I don't speak much French. This becomes apparent as I struggle to order a celebratory drink on board the Sea France ferry from Dover to Calais.
The barman treats my attempts with the same disdain as my year 9 French teacher had.
The next few days' cycling through France and Belgium should prove interesting.
Our last night in London had been frantic.
Last-minute details and outstanding tasks - like condensing our lives down to four pannier bags - were finally completed at 2.30am.
I hit the sack, too excited and nervous to sleep in the hours until Matt and I were to leave on our cycle journey to the other side of the world.
The panic continued next morning when, halfway into London, I realised I'd forgotten my tent at my flat.
Regardless, I made it to Trafalgar Square just in time to meet our friends and relatives who'd gathered to see us off.
Thirteen of the crowd would act as our farewell peloton and accompany us all the way to our first stop - 65 miles to the not-too-exotic Canterbury camping site.
Posing for myriad photos did not sit well with our nerves.
After a year-and-a-half of planning, saving and talking, the moment for us to finally leave had come.
We both felt the lure of the open road.
The sun came out as we set off, which made for an uncomfortably hot ride along the A2.
This was a mistake as, unlike other European motorists we've encountered, British drivers don't often show much courtesy towards cyclists; a few of the group were even happy-slapped by some kids in a passing car.
Stopping for lunch after 35 miles, I found that I was shaking from tiredness, this being my first real ride with 66 lbs of kit strapped to the bike.
Matt looked fine (sunburn aside) and still wore the same grin he'd had from the start.
The final miles were less taxing on our legs and spirits, and we all made it to the campsite tired, sun-kissed and more than ready for a cold beer and pizza.
We spent our last evening in the company of our friends, discussing the journey ahead.
It was reassuring to hear Matt admitting to a certain sense of uncertainty: we both felt excited and happy to finally be on the road, but equally shared a fear of what lay ahead.
The next morning we all set out on the short cross-country ride to Dover.
Unfortunately, neither of us is blessed with a good sense of direction, so we ended up getting a bit lost on the way.
A series of unintentional, if pretty, detours meant we made it with 10 minutes to spare - a blessing, in a way, as this made our final goodbyes mercifully short and sharp.
I shed some tears at the pain of the farewell; Matt remained stoically quiet.
The reality of what we're attempting is sinking in. The talking and planning is over. Now the adventure can really begin.