The saddle saga: highs and lows in France
Cycling in France is very different from cycling in the UK.
In France, a passing motorist would sooner hit an oncoming car than stray too close to a cyclist, and they always wait patiently to overtake - a far cry from the cavalier attitude of some British motorists who panic when they see a bicycle and seem to feel the urge to overtake at all costs.
Perhaps this is due to the French national obsession with cycling, but it made it a pleasure passing through north-eastern France's immaculate countryside.
I was struck by the beauty of each French village we came across: every lawn was pristine, colourful flowers were everywhere, and yet we rarely saw any people.
Some villages were like perfectly preserved ghost towns.
We made good progress, and were soon heading west where, unbeknown to us, there was a heatwave - temperatures were predicted to reach 102?F in the shade.
Riding an 88lb bike in the direct glare of the blazing sun - especially with our un-acclimatised English skin - became foolhardy.
So we began to rise early and enjoy the cool of the early morning, followed by taking long siestas to escape the oppressive heat in the middle of the day, and returning to the saddle in the afternoon as the heat subsided.
Our new routine worked well, except on one day when we rose late and decided to cycle in the midday sun.
The action of cycling generated a deceptively cooling breeze and it was not until we stopped at 6pm that we realised how dazed and drained we were.
Spotting a thermometer in the shade, I was shocked to see it read 88?F. I don't know exactly how hot it had been at midday, but when a passing motorist lent out of the window and put his finger to his temple, we should have taken the hint.
Passing through France on our way to Luxembourg, we came across dozens of war graves dotted around the countryside.
We should have expected them, and yet they came as a surprise and made us reflect on what had occurred not that long ago in the fields we were passing.
The Commonwealth War Graves Commission constructed and maintains 2,500 cemeteries paying tribute to the 1.7 million men and women in the Commonwealth forces who died during the two World Wars.
Today, the graves act as a stark reminder of the past and a useful warning to future generations.
The terrain became increasingly tough as we approached the Ardennes region in France, the climbs becoming longer and steeper.
But as we dropped down to Boullion in Belgium, we were rewarded with mile after mile of endless switchbacks through lush forest; I couldn't help but grin from ear to ear.
We decided to celebrate with Nutella and marshmallow sandwiches that night, and pondered what the road ahead might hold for us: perhaps our first shower in a week, or maybe even a hot meal.