The saddle saga: warm showers and hot meals
As Matt and I continue our journey, the on-the-road conversations move between the same subjects again and again: the steepness of the hills, food, how ridiculously hot it is (we are English, so it would be wrong not to mention the weather), food, inconsiderate motorists, food and all the small things that we miss.
Chief amongst these is warm showers.
Riding heavily-laden bikes through undulating countryside in scorching temperatures without this luxury began to get us down.
Thank God then, for Marino wool. This helps to keep us stink-free. Although we do whiff a little of damp sheep after a long day in the saddle, this is preferable to the alternative and allows us to blend in with the farming communities of the Ardennes and Alsace regions of France and Belgium.
It was after eight days along the hilly roadways of Luxembourg when we decided that we couldn't bear to wash in another road-side toilet.
We searched for somewhere to pitch our tents and eventually found Kockleschuer campsite, 2.5 miles from Luxembourg city.
That first shower was bliss.
As I stood underneath the tepid jet, watching the dirty brown water disappear down the plug, it felt as if each drop was sent from heaven.
It was amazing how such a simple thing lifted our outlook.
Tough as it was to leave behind the showers, we had to move on - but, as it turned out, to even more comfort.
Next stop was Strasbourg, where two of our Facebook fans had arranged a free hotel room for us, giving us the opportunity to stroll around the UNESCO-listed cobbled streets by night and to sleep in soft, comfy beds.
We were sorry to leave after just one night as we felt that there was much more to see, but Munich beckoned.
The next morning we demolished the breakfast buffet before making our way across the Rhine to take on the Baden hills of the Schwarzwald.
Here we encountered the first long, steep climb of the trip from the town of Bad Griesbach ("Bad" means "Spa" in German, not, "Lookout! There's a horrendously steep hill to climb in a bit!").
The climb had sneaked up on us and, before we knew it, we were huffing and puffing up a 12 per cent incline that stretched on for miles.
With legs of jelly and drenched in sheep-scented sweat, we reached the 3,000-foot summit.
It was thrilling to have managed such a steep climb in the heat - plus we now had an equally steep downhill stretch to look forward to.
The remaining journey to Munich was a dream: well-signed and flat cycle routes blazed a trail so easy to follow that we were able to ride the 125 miles from Ulm to Munich in one day.
Arriving in the city, we met the Bunting family who had graciously offered us beds for the duration of our stay, giving us the chance to explore the famous Bavarian beer gardens (which we did with gusto).
Leaving Bavaria we were once again treated to flat roads, easy-to-follow cycle paths, courteous drivers and the warmth of an Indian summer.
We hoped that our good fortune would continue into the decidedly less flat regions of the Austrian Alps; as the cloud-tipped mountains on the horizon grew closer, though, that hope began to diminish.