The saddle saga: wild ascents and wilder camping
There is a sense of ironic symmetry to riding a bicycle over mountains, particularly a heavily laden touring bike. It is like experiencing the perfect ying and yang. 
First, there is a long, sweaty, strained struggle to the summit. 
There are false dawns along the way, when you think the climb (and your own strength) is nearly at an end, only to discover another long incline ahead which is even steeper than the last.
And then, when you do finally reach the highest peak, a sense of calm washes over you. 
A few moments pass as you rest your aching muscles before you hurtle down the other side. The strain of the climb is forgotten as you reach speeds of 50mph, barely able to absorb the breathtaking views all around as you concentrate on cornering the next switchback without drifting towards the oncoming traffic.
Crossing the Alps has been incredibly difficult, and the contrast of the exertion of rising up over some of those mountains, only to switch within seconds to the exhilaration of a descent, has been extreme. 
The simple rule, though: the longer and harder the climb, the more rewarding the descent.
Wild camping is something we have had to adjust to on this expedition in order to keep the costs down, especially in Western Europe. 
Wild camping is when you pitch your tent in a non-campsite environment, usually in an untamed rural location. 
It is free but also illegal through much of Europe, so there is some element of risk involved, plus the only washing facilities are generally a nearby river (if we're lucky).
We have found a strange array of places to camp so far: a football dug out, a golf course, an orchard, a restaurant garden, and a tourist information centre, as well as the more usual woods and fields. 
Most memorable was on our first night in Slovenia, when we slept on a restaurant terrace overlooking the mountain we had just climbed from Austria, the Loibel pass.
In Austria, we had been lucky to have a break from wild camping, though, staying with some friends, Matt and Julie Crawford, in their chalet in Zell am See. 
We enjoyed a couple of nights by the lake with beds, showers, good food and better company, before regaining the strength to take on the rest of the Alps. 
We planned the route through Austria as best we could but still needed to tackle at least one mountain climb each day.