Around the world by rail: part four - Darwin to Sydney
When the railway linking Adelaide to Darwin was finally completed in 2004 - 126 years after work on the project began - a Sydney journalist cruelly remarked that The Ghan, named in honour of the Afghan cameleers who opened up the Australian interior, was a train which went "from nowhere to nowhere".
In a nation which once prided itself on building roads, railways and bridges to conquer the "tyranny of distance" which marooned Europeans around the perimeter of Australia, The Ghan was seen as faintly ludicrous - an imperial relic from the 19th century.
But the scene that greets me at the Darwin terminus on this sunny winter morning proves the doubters and naysayers wrong.
There are six coaches of excited passengers, from young backpackers to sprightly seniors, queuing up outside the modern station.
So popular has The Ghan become that on some days the train comprises 31 coaches - its shiny aluminium form stretching far into the dry tropical scrub.
The Darwin terminus may lack the grandeur of Europe's great stations or the frenetic bustle of an Indian one, but there is a tangible air of expectation.
Before us lies a journey of 1,851 miles through the heart of the Australian continent, but for the moment I'm faced with the prospect of just finding my carriage, P5, and my "Platinum" cabin - which I'm told comes with a double bed and a bathroom with "premium fittings".
I arrive in time to find a young assistant fitting a set of steps to the door - the train can be so long the architects obviously ditched the idea of building a platform that stretches half a mile long; it's a typical piece of Australian ingenuity - inelegant but practical.
First impressions are overwhelmingly positive. My cabin, while not huge, provides the illusion of occupying your own sitting room.
The attendant soon arrives with nibbles and a glass of chilled champagne and there's just time to pack away my things and twiddle with a few knobs and dials (all the cabins on The Ghan have an audio system and innumerable light switches) before the train edges its way out of the siding and south to Adelaide.