World Cup 2010: Who are the favourites
With the World Cup now just three days away, the pressure on the players is only growing as fans\' anticipation reaches fever pitch.
While all 736 players involved in this summer\'s fabled tournament will have their eyes on lifting the trophy come July 11 at Soccer City in Johannesburg, a select few will also have their eyes on another, more individual prize.
Yesterday we looked at the odds for the Golden Boot, but what about the other end of the pitch?
Which team will be the meanest and keep the most clean sheets in the tournament?
The favourite five
Spain | Iker Casillas
Why he can do it:
Spain conceded just five goals in their 10 qualifying matches, which amounts to one every two games or a goal every 180 minutes. That\'s a pretty mean record and one Casillas will be looking to mirror as his side try to win the World Cup.
A 6-0 friendly win over Poland signalled their intentions to do just that.
Titan Bet odds: 6.00
Brazil | Julio Cesar
Why he can do it:
Historically not known for their tight defences, the Brazilians built up a reputation for a \'you score one, we\'ll score two\' approach to the beautiful game, but Dunga\'s side have become decidedly frugal of late - letting in 11 goals in 18 qualifying games. And with beasts like Lucio at the back, no wonder chances are hard to come by.
Titan Bet odds: 6.50
England | David James
Why he can do it:
England\'s goalkeeping and defensive situation is far from sorted before they take on USA in their opening game on Saturday, but the Three Lions conjure up an image of die hard, last ditch defending, the sort that puts team before the individual. It was this approach that limited other qualifying sides to just six goals.
Titan Bet odds: 7.50
Argentina | Sergio Romero
Why he can do it:
With Diego Maradona in charge of his beloved Argentina, anything is possible.
The pint-sized manager wanted luxury toilets at his training camp, but he\'ll be hoping his side don\'t flush their chances away with poor defending - they let in 20 goals in qualifying after all.
The lack of fire power in Nigera, South Korea and Greece may be a saving grace.
Titan Bet odds: 8.50
Italy | Gigi Buffon
Why he can do it:
Famed for Catenaccio, it\'s a little surprising Italy aren\'t further up this list. Especially after a qualifying campaign that saw them concede just seven goals.
An aging backline certainly won\'t help, but New Zealand, Paraguay and Slovakia will hardly test the regimental Mediterraneans, especially with the ever-dependable Gigi Buffon in goal.
Titan Bet odds: 11.00
The value bet
Germany
Manuel Neuer
Titan Bet odds: 13.00
Why he can do it: Just five goals given away in qualifying and with a goalkeeper that is highly rated across Europe in Manuel Neuer, Germany should be hard to score past, but will be tested by the sprightly Australia, the physical Ghana and the enthusiastic Serbia.
France
Hugo Lloris
Titan Bet odds: 15.00
Why he can do it:
Hardly a smooth qualification from the French who needed a hand (literally) to squeeze past Ireland in a play-off.
They didn\'t exactly chuck goals away, but conceded nine in 10 games.
Hugo Lloris, though, is more than capable of earning a clean sheet on his own.
Holland
Maarten Stekelenburg
Titan Bet odds: 15.00
Why he can do it:
No place for Edwin van der Sar in this tournament\'s Holland squad so the responsibility of keeping the goals out falls to Ajax\'s Maarten Stekelenburg.
The Dutch were the meanest of all the European sides in qualifying, letting a mere two goals in, and could be a good bet at 15.00 with Denmark, Japan and Cameroon in their group.
Portugal
Eduardo
Titan Bet odds: 21.00
Why he can do it:
Portugal finished just two points behind group leaders Denmark in qualifying and conceded only five goals (and none in their two play-off legs against Bosnia).
The man between the sticks is the relatively unheard of Eduardo, who plays for Braga, and has been a reliable custodian for Carlos Quieroz all through qualifying.
Serbia
Vladimir Stojkovic
Titan Bet odds: 26.00
Why he can do it:
Wigan understudy Vladimir Stojkovic guards the onion bag for Serbia, and did a pretty good job in qualifying, letting eight goals in as Radomir Antic\'s side topped their group ahead of France, Austria and Romania.
Keeping the goals out against Germany will be a different stoy, though.
The worthwhile flutters
Ivory Coast: (34.00) Africa is not known for producing World Class shot-stoppers but at least Ivory Coast keeper Boubacar Barry can lay claim to having the best name at this year\'s tournament.
Only four goals conceded during qualifying but since when have Burkina Faso, Malawi and Guinea been known for their fire power?
Mexico: (34.00) No longer is Jorge Campos around to scar our retinas with his garish, self-designed goalie shirts. The unattached, 37-year-old Oscar Perez is the No.1 these days.
If he turns up in a multi-colour jersey, he\'s got my bet.
Chile: (41.00) Claudio Bravo may well be able to keep the goals out against plucky Honduras and Switzerland, but will be a busy boy against Spain. Expect that clean sheet to be ruled out early on.
Paraguay: (41.00) If Justo Villar is anything like former Paraguay keeper Jose Luis Chilavert, expect him to take the team\'s penalties, free-kicks and just about anything he can get a shot on goal with.
But at 41.00 it\'s a very long shot to keep the most clean sheets - the sort of long shot Chilavert would still try and score with.
Titan Bet are giving away an incredible $100 million to the fan who can correctly predict all 64 games in the World Cup. There is a guaranteed $1 million up for grabs for the fan who comes closest!