Zodiac sign Capricorn Love Compatibility
Capricorn and Aries love compatibility
Not a hopeful combination.
Saturn, represented by Father Time, is the Capricorn's standard bearer.
The Aries is a restless,fiery, impulsive experimenter. The Capricorn is on the contrary sanctimonious person.
Capricorn needs to dominate and so does Aries.
Problems also crop up over money Aries is extravagant, Capricorn is security minded.
Capricorn is a simple soul and Aries may be too overwhelming; Aries will take risks and enjoy them while the same risks will make Capricorn shudder.
Some very violent quarrels can erupt due to this and the many other personality conflicts.
Aries will not like the pessimistic gloom that Capricorn use to dampen the Aries enthusiasms.
If it takes place, a marriage is more preferable then a short connection.
Capricorn and Taurus love compatibility
Both partners having mutual understanding of each other's personalities.
Both the Capricorn and the Taurus like money, and sure that the safety is really important.
While the Taurus is a patient person the Capricorn is ready to work for both of them.
Taurus can get through to aloof, cautious Capricorn and give the encouragement and responsiveness needed.
Both have earthy, passionate natures, and sensual Taurus can tap the deep well of romanticism that lies under Capricorn's reserve.
There are perfect prospects for that couple and it can turn out to be a very compatible marriage.
Capricorn and Gemini love compatibility
They have different sexual natures.
The Saturn ruled Capricorn will be at odds with the Mercury ruled Gemini.
The Gemini are usually easy-going, amorous people, while the Capricorn are sluggish, devoted, cautious.
Capricorn will have a hard time holding the reins on excitable, flirtatious, wayward Gemini.
The initial interest can not last very long.
Capricorn and Cancer love compatibility
The Capricorn is not able to pay very much attention to the partner, and it doesn't meet the Cancer's wishes.
The Capricorn has too much other interests.
Both are good money managers and are unlikely to have many financial problems.
Waste is an offense to Capricorn as is extravagance.
Capricorn is a faithful and devoted mate which the more positive type of Cancer can be content with, even if life does get a little boring at times.
The connection is unstable, the marriage is undesirable.
Capricorn and Leo love compatibility
Ordered, organized Capricorn neither understands nor approves of Leo's exuberant impulsiveness.
Leo forgives and forgets; Capricorn being the one who is slow to anger and seldom forgets.
The Leo supposes that the Capricorn is full of love and spends it too economically.
The Capricorn for his/her turn is also not the best partner for the Leo because of his/her poor imagination.
They are both representatives of independent signs of the zodiac that inclined to dominate in everyday life.
Capricorn and Virgo love compatibility
Virgo's neat orderly mind meshes well with Capricorn's self-discipline and capacity for hard work.
Both take pride in their home, enjoy having a few close friends rather than many acquaintances, and admire each other's intellectual abilities.
The Caoricorn's practicality suits the Virgo's accuracy perfectly.
They are both - clever, conservative and patient.
This relationship could suffer from lack of romance, as both tend to be a bit reserved in this area.
Generally there is a good basis for a long union.
Capricorn and Libra love compatibility
Libra in her/his part likes the Capricorn's aspiration to earn money.
However, the Libra's propensity for laziness irritates the Capricorn who got used to work without a rest.
As a result the Libra will be dissatisfied by a Capricorn's sober practicality.
The Capricorn wouldn't like Libra's constant attempts to be center of everyone's attention.
Capricorn and Scorpio love compatibility
Scorpio is the more imaginative lover, but Capricorn's stamina is a delightful match.
Scorpio's possessiveness spells security to Capricorn.
These two work well as a team - Capricorn is highly organized and Scorpio has native shrewdness.
The Scorpio is more inventive, while the Capricorn is more patient.
The representatives of both signs have strong will, but the Scorpio is inclined to dominate. The Capricorn must understand, that it happens because of the Scorpio's great love.