Aquarius Traits
Aquarius traits are a mix of friendly, outgoing nature and with a sense of high originality and idealism.
In this article, know more about the same.
One of the most interesting, erratic and yet brilliant people are the Aquarians.
Born between January 20th and February 19th, Aquarius sign people are ruled by the planet Saturn.
The water bearer symbol of the creative genius Aquarius, that shows the identity of a man pouring forth water from a jug symbolizes the human community.
One of the lesser known facts about this zodiac sign is that Aquarius is an intellectual air sign and not a water sign.
Aquarius traits are a bag full of several interesting personality traits.
They can talk to you on several topics, can hold intellectual discussions but can become uncomfortable if you start discussing their feelings.
Characteristics and Features of Aquarius
Aquarius traits and personality are dominated by air element.
According to astrology, air represents dynamism, motion and movement.
One of the most important Aquarius traits that is inherent in their personality is that they're born communicators.
Intellectual thinking is emphasized over other works and their words can convey power, grace and force.
A general command over language and an ability to be a very good communicator is one of the most evident signs of their personality.
The characteristics of Aquarius zodiac sign that can often be observed in Aquarian personality is that they can be enthusiastic, edgy and highly idealistic at times and sometimes they can turn introvert, shy and less talkative.
Although, brimming with ideas, they also want to explore extrovert and materialistic lives.
Often, they tend to sit back and dive in their inner lives, to find a balance between the external and internal.
The likes and dislikes of an Aquarius personality are very rigid.
It's difficult for an Aquarian to change his/her mind, once they've taken a decision.
Aquarius Characteristics: Male
One of the personality characteristics of a Aquarius male is that he is an unpredictable guy, confident and yet prefers to be silent in a group.
Amidst a group of people, he keeps himself reserved and is a master in concealing his truer self.
Quick witted and funny, Aquarian males love to be in close, passionate and intimate relationships.
Aquarius love to be with friendly people who are fun loving and have some flair for intellectual thinking.
An Aquarius man in love expects his partner to give him plenty of space but then he doesn't want her to be away for long time.
Also, he doesn't fall in love easily.
Being an intellectual thinker, he gives himself sufficient time to know a partner and only then he commits to her.
Aquarius man go easily along with zodiac signs like Libra and Gemini, as they're most compatible with Aquarius sign.
Most importantly, although Aquarius man may not appear very caring, they're certainly very true and loyal to their partners.
Aquarius Characteristics: Female
Self controlled, honest and sensible - these are the very few Aquarius traits that define an Aquarian women.
With a charming smile, she is friendly, outgoing and loved by friends.
Laughter and smiles are an integral part of her life and she can't remain sad all the time.
She may not be one of the best homemakers but certainly, she is very popular in the social circle.
These women in love have a great respect for loyalty and honesty in relationships.
In fact, one of the prime features of people belonging to this zodiac sign is that both the partners hold high regards for loyalty and trust.
An Aquarius woman finds it difficult to forgive people, if she is hurt, even once.
Personality traits of an Aquarius man or woman are common when it comes to the outgoing nature, friendly disposition and seriousness in relationships.
Owing to their communication skills, they can be very understanding and happy with their partners.
The zodiac sign Aquarius represents a personality full of life, zeal and extrovert qualities.
Aquarius traits make the personality of an Aquarian richer and he is known to be an interesting person in any group.
They're certainly someone who're easy to get along with and to be made great friends.