What are some common illogical scenes that occur in films?
Car Chases
In which the protagonist is in an incredibly quick car (or even on a motorcycle), pursued by antagonists in a much slower vehicle, and yet the slower vehicle keeps up with them effortlessly- especially true when the chase takes place on highways or stretches of road with minimal traffic- realistically the protagonist could simply floor it and leave the pursuer in the dust, but instead they continue to trade paint neck-and-neck.
One recent example I can recall is Drive (w/ Ryan Gosling), in which his character is fleeing a crime scene in a Mustang GT 500, yet can't shake the pursuer in a (non-hemi) Chrysler 300.
The Mustang has 600+ horsepower for god's sake (not to mention the character is an incredibly skilled driver).
Hand-to-Hand Combat
When a protagonist in a film is highly skilled in hand-to-hand combat, easily defeats all opponents throughout the film, but then encounters the final/main antagonist in the climax, and he/she is a near perfect match in skill level with regards to combat.
The latest example I can think of is Mission Impossible: Ghost Protocol (an excellent film nonetheless), in which Ethan Hunt is able to handily overpower all baddies he encounters, but at the end finds himself equally matched fighting a rich Swedish businessman.
Another recent example I can recall was Quantum of Solace. Was a utilities company CEO really a match for MI6's top field agent?
One film (or series, rather) that bucks this trend are the Bourne films, and I love them for it.
Bourne is one of the world's most skilled in hand-to-hand combat, as shown throughout the movie, and very rarely is he truly challenged in that regard (as it should be, given his training and abilities).
Even the supposed best-of-the-best cronies sent after him are dispatched relatively easily (perhaps with the exception of Desh in Ultimatum).
High School Students
-In the real world they don't all look like they're 27 years old.
Medical cliches:
People "flat-line" all the time on an EKG:
Apparently, you instantly become electrically neutral the very second you die or have an arrhythmia.
Oh but you get to (almost) finish your sentence and vanish into sudden cardiac death or a deep coma in a split second.
People who get a "heart attack" fall to the ground and preferably drop dead instantly.
People get heart attacks solely because of emotional surges, also, there never were any earlier symptoms.
People who faint never seize or piss their pants.
People are in comas for years and will never open their eyes [in reality, after a matter of weeks, you get into a vegetative state which gives patients a basic day-night rhythm with opening of the eyes and often an eye reflex that follows motion in the room].
After magically waking up from one of these comas, no muscle atrophy that takes months to be fixed, limp for a few steps and off you go!
People perform CPR and pericardial thumps (you know, the big blow to the chest) with great drama without ever breaking the victim's rib or getting tired.
Doctors do everything, from surgeries to scans to endoscopies yet find the time to have a deep talk with their favourite patient when they feel like it.
An intravenous injection is done by ramming a needle somewhere in somebody's arm at a 90 degree angle.
People seize more often than they sneeze in hospitals
People who get bitten by something venomous die in a matter of seconds.
Getting shot in the leg is completely fine, you never hit the femoral artery and bleed out in seconds.
A shot in the abdomen on the other hand does kill you instantly.
A blow to the back of your head instantly knocks you out. Also, you just wake up dizzy after a few minutes.
Contusion or massive intracranial bleed never occurs.
Being terminally or critically ill is a sudden process always announced when feeling perfectly fine, preferably by coughing up or vomiting blood.
Labs and especially cultures that take weeks come back in a matter of minutes.
All patients relevant to the script have private rooms, even if they initially came for an innocent ailment.
Unless of course an inter-patient romance/friendship has to occur, then that guy with the plague will practically bunk with that immune-impaired cancer patient.
If a new scene begins with a hall shot, a doctor must be called on the PA. This happens every few seconds or so as long as the conversation takes place in said hall.
Critically ill or trauma patients get transported through the hospital as if they were on a bumper car.
Automatic doors do not exist, slam those doors open in slow motion with your floppy white coat for added drama!
Speaking of white coats, these will be nonchalantly wide-open, because that's what they're for, looking "doctorey" yet casual.
Two very common scenes in movies are:
Vehicles that don't make sounds until they come into view.
Someone is at a remote location, say, on top of a sand dune in a desert or the roof of a skyscraper. It's dead quiet.
And suddenly a VERY LOUD vehicle -- usually a helicopter, tank, or other extremely large and noisy vehicle -- arises into view, its engines SCREAMING.
And of course, the person doesn't hear a thing until the very moment they see the vehicle, and are therefore completely surprised by the vehicle's appearance.
The sound of airplane wheels hitting the tarmac.
In countless movies, you hear a "chirping" sound as the rubber of the wheels strikes the tarmac during an airplane landing.
The thing is: airplanes don't actually make this sound when they land.
It was invented by a film sound designer sometime in the fifties or sixties, and has somehow entered the public consciousness as a sound that people take for granted exists.
(I work at a company that specializes in audio, and a colleague who gives frequent lectures told a packed room the story of how, years ago, he went with a sound designer to go record airplanes landing at an airport, and they were stunned to find that the sound made by airplane wheels touching down was... relative silence.)