The 8 1/2 Laws of Rumor Spread
If I'm not gullible and you're not gullible, how come some improbable stories take a long time to die?
"The money it's cost me," said clothing designer Tommy Hilfiger. "It hurt my integrity."
"It" was the shocking story that had circulated for years on the Internet and through word of mouth: Hilfiger, known for his colorful, preppy styles, had supposedly appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show to air a disturbing grievance. "If I had known that African-Americans, Hispanics, and Asians would buy my clothes, I would not have made them so nice," Hilfiger complained. "I wish those people would not buy my clothes - they were made for upper-class whites."
According to the tale, an outraged Winfrey immediately asked Hilfiger to leave her show - and when she came back from a commercial, he was gone.
Never mind that intentionally alienating your core market isn't exactly a shrewd business strategy. Never mind that Hilfiger had founded a philanthropic fund to benefit inner city youth long before the rumor even appeared, or that he donated over $5 million toward building a memorial to Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., in Washington.
Of course, Hilfiger had never said anything of the sort.
At the time the rumor surfaced and spread, Hilfiger had never been on The Oprah Winfrey Show.
In fact, the two had never met until 2007, when Winfrey did invite him onto the show to try to squelch the rumor once and for all.
"The next time somebody sends you an email or somebody mentions this rumor to you, you know what you're supposed say to them?" said Winfrey. "You're supposed to say, 'That's a big fat lie!'"
Nor did the president of Procter & Gamble appear on The Phil Donahue Show to "come out of the closet" about his company's ties to the Church of Satan.
Nor did Liz Claiborne tell Oprah that black people shouldn't wear her clothes - which didn't stop director Spike Lee from telling Esquire magazine, "It definitely happened. Get the tape.
Every black woman in America needs to go to her closet, throw that shit out, and never buy another stitch of clothes from Liz Claiborne."
Skeptical or gullible, we all buy into rumors sometimes.
Even Barbara Mikkelson, who runs the popular myth-debunking Web site Snopes.com with her husband David, admits she's swallowed some whoppers.
"A friend told me that when his friend's daughter was off on vacation, she had a whirlwind romance with this charismatic guy," Mikkelson says. "When it was time for her to come home, he gave her a package. Inside was a ceramic coffin with a message on it: 'Welcome to the world of AIDS.'
I believed that one hook, line, and sinker."
Rumors have a way of slipping under our mental defenses before we think to question them. The best ones sidestep common sense entirely.
"Think of the lawsuits parents filed over subliminal messages in heavy metal songs," says Martin Bourgeois, a rumor researcher at Florida Gulf Coast University.
"People believed Judas Priest was planting messages to make teenagers commit suicide; no one thought to ask, 'Why would a rock band want its audience dead?'"
Most of us don't like to think of ourselves as gullible.
But we're especially likely to accept as true - and do our best to spread - tales that have several specific characteristics that take aim at our best defenses.
At its core, a rumor is just an unverified scrap of information we pass among ourselves to make sense of the world.
In one case study conducted at Ohio University by psychologist Mark Pezzo, students had heard that someone on campus had died of meningitis.
The story spread because the anxious students were trying to find out what was going on: "Is the rumor true?"
"How do you get meningitis?"
"I heard that everyone on campus will need to have a painful spinal tap, did you hear that?"
In the marketplace of misinformation, fit rumors survive and spread like epidemics, while unfit rumors die quick deaths.
So what separates the fit from the unfit?
What, in short, are the laws of effective rumors?
Successful rumors needle our anxieties and emotions.
When Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans in 2005, water wasn't the only thing that flooded the city.
In the environment of intense anxiety and uncertainty, grim rumors flourished: Sharks have infested the water!
Terrorists planted bombs in the levees!
Murdered babies and piles of corpses filled the Superdome!
Unfortunately, the national media reported many of the rumors as fact - especially after a misinformed Mayor Ray Nagin told talk show hosts like Oprah Winfrey that "hundreds of armed gang members" were killing and raping at will inside the dome.
Yet once the crisis began to abate, investigators found that almost all of the widely circulated stories were false.
FEMA doctors even showed up at the Superdome with a refrigerated 18-wheeler to cart away the hundreds of dead bodies rumored.
They found six - none of them a homicide victim.
So why did these stories pop up?
Fear breeds rumor.
The more collective anxiety a group has, the more inclined it will be to start up the rumor mill.
As Rochester Institute of Technology rumor expert Nicholas DiFonzo explains, we pass rumors around primarily as a means of deciphering scary, uncertain situations: Exchanging information, even if it's ludicrously false, relieves our unease by giving us a sense that we at least know what's happening.
"One major function of rumors is to figure out the facts and find what the appropriate, adaptive thing to do is.
Look at 9/11. I don't ever remember feeling so threatened as I did after 9/11, and people used rumors to try to manage the threat."
Thus when 9/11 left people terrified and searching for answers, they heard a horde of alarming (and completely false) rumors - that terrorists had injected anthrax into one of every five cans of Pepsi, that no Jews showed up to work at the World Trade Center on 9/11 because they knew about the attacks beforehand. (In fact, about 15 percent of those who died in the attacks were Jewish.)
Very few of the tales were positive, because we're naturally more inclined to pass on negative information.
"As humans, we have a tendency to weight negative information more," says Helen Harton, a psychology professor at the University of Northern Iowa. "It makes evolutionary sense. It's more important to know how to avoid a tiger than to know where a field of nice flowers is."
Of course, most of us don't have to worry about tiger attacks anymore, but we do dread things like layoffs at work. So we toss rumors back and forth to figure out what's really up.
Rumors stick if they're somewhat surprising but still fit with our existing biases.
If you ever open endlessly forwarded e-mails, you're probably familiar with at least one notorious malapropism from President George W. Bush: "The problem with the French is that they don't have a word for 'entrepreneur.'"
Or this embarrassing gem from the pop starlet Mariah Carey: "When I watch TV and see those poor starving kids all over the world, I can't help but cry.
I mean, I'd love to be skinny like that, but not with all those flies and death and stuff."
Can you believe they actually said these things?
Well, don't.
Both quips were made up by pranksters. Even so, they enjoyed viral spread for the simple reason that both are juicy enough to be shocking - yet not so far-fetched that we doubt the two parties could have uttered them.
They confirm what many already believe - that Bush is, let's say, not quite firing on all cylinders, and that Carey is a vain diva - without setting off too many common-sense alarms.
In short, we're primed to accept them.
As Mikkelson explains, "These stories get in under our radar because they click in with what we already believe, or want to believe."
If you already think liberals are waging a war on religion, you'll be more likely to buy 2008's (untrue) rumor that the new dollar coins omit the customary "In God We Trust." (It's printed along the side.)
If you buy the idea that too much money unhinges people from reality, you might believe the story that Tiger Woods rented a mansion for the 2007 U.S. Open, moved everything out, and flew in all of his own furniture so he would feel at home during the four-day tournament.
Even when presented with evidence refuting a rumor, we often stick to our biases.
A 2007 University of Maryland study found that only 3 percent of Pakistanis believe Al Qaeda was responsible for 9/11.
"It's difficult for them to accept that Al Qaeda, their fellow Muslims, could have perpetrated these acts," says DiFonzo.
Easily swayed people are more important than influential people in passing on a rumor.
In the mid-1970s, the Life Savers Company introduced a product that revolutionized the way kids chewed gum: Bubble Yum.
Before it came along, you had to work on a piece of gum for ages to make it soft enough to blow bubbles. But Bubble Yum was squishy right out of the wrapper.
It was the perfect gum? maybe a little too perfect, kids thought.
What was making it so soft?
Soon, the obvious answer presented itself: spider eggs.
Bubble Yum was made with spider eggs.
This bit of schoolyard conjecture became ironclad truth with staggering speed, sending Bubble Yum's sky-high sales into a tailspin.
Within 10 days of first getting wind of the rumor, Life Savers executives commissioned surveys that revealed "well over half" of New York area children had already heard it.
The spider egg story didn't zoom from kid to kid so quickly because of well-connected playground information magnates or influential adolescent gum mavens, but because kids are credulous, and credulous people make rumors go.
"It's your willingness to pass things along that matters, not necessarily how much status or respect you have," says Duncan Watts, a sociologist who researches information spread for Yahoo.
Kids will believe almost anything (another long-lived schoolyard rumor claimed the "Mikey likes it" Life cereal kid died after a mixture of soda and Pop Rocks made his stomach explode), and thus rumors run rampant in schools.
But the same is true of gullible adults: They're the ones who really fuel rumors.
The more you hear a rumor, the more you'll buy it - even if you're hearing that it's false.
According to a poll, 11 percent of Americans believe the rumor that Barack Obama is secretly a radical Muslim who refuses to say the Pledge of Allegiance and was sworn into the Senate on the Qur'an (and probably hates mom and apple pie as well).
The myth that he is a Muslim is so pervasive that The New Yorker could satirize it on a cover depicting a cheery new prez Obama hanging out in the White House in full Islamic garb - with an American flag burning in the fireplace and a portrait of Osama bin Laden on the wall.
But if the hyper-liberal New Yorker was trying to expose the absurdity of the rumor, someone probably should have talked to Mark Pezzo first.
Even hearing that a rumor is bunk, he observes, tends to plant it deeper in your mind.
"No question, the more you hear something - even the same thing from the same person - the more you believe it," says Pezzo. "Politicians know all about this; the more I heard about weapons of mass destruction, the more believable they seemed to me.
Even a denial can be a repetition of a rumor." (Just ask Senator John Kerry, whose 2004 presidential bid sunk thanks to whispers about his swift-boat service in Vietnam - even though most of the media stories were about how the rumors were false.)