PHILIP LAID BARE
Natural athlete: Prince Philip waterskiing in 1951
A funny thing happened on the way to the Abbey. 
Whenever Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, was in view during last month's Royal Wedding, he was applauded as wildly as the Queen herself.
It seemed to set the seal on his new relationship with the British public: one of unqualified affection. 
The tetchy comments and caustic asides no longer give any more offence than a great-grandfather muttering by the fireside.
Prince Philip, stiff-backed and sprightly as he turns 90 today, has become an institution, applauded for giving support and encouragement to the Queen over a period of more than 60 years, thus making him the longest-serving royal consort in British history.
Yet as Philip Eade demonstrates in this highly readable biography of Prince Philip's first 30 years, this extraordinary man endured a childhood of such turmoil that nowadays the social services would have placed him in care. 
He was born in June 1921, the youngest of five children, at a time when thrones and principalities were being toppled like ninepins across Europe.
Mired in bloody revolutions, Philip's father Andrea, a member of the Greek royal family and first cousin of George V, only narrowly escaped Greece with his life.
Traumatised, he left his children behind to be looked after by his wife's family and lived a playboy existence around Europe's watering-holes. 
Philip's beautiful, affectionate mother, who was born deaf, succeeded in getting her five children out of Greece but became increasingly dotty, blessing her teacup and leaping out of a clinic window with a bundle of laundry. 
She was committed to an asylum when Philip was nine.
Philip was doubly homeless. 
His Danish grandfather had been invited to become King of Greece: he himself had no Greek blood. 
Yet for much of his school life he was known simply as Greece, which must have confused fellow pupils staring at his bright blue eyes and flaxen hair.
From the age of nine, until he moved into Clarence House as Princess Elizabeth's husband, he had no fixed place he could call home. 
Instead he moved between his extended family, such as his distant cousins the Milford Havens. 
He went to school first at Cheam and then in 1933 to Salem in Germany, where most of his family actually originated. 
At Salem he came under the influence of philosopher Kurt Hahn, a charismatic figure who had a great influence on Philip and, much later on his own son, Prince Charles.
A fine athlete: Prince Philip collecting the Dowdray Park Gold Cup
Eade is right to devote several pages to this strange figure. 
He was a throwback to the Victorian era when it was thought moral decay had to be combated by a regime of fitness for the mind and body.
Boys had to run a quarter of a mile before breakfast, drink milk at meals and do exercises while teachers read to them. 
This regime, which suited Philip, a fine athlete, might have encompassed all his education. 
But Hahn was a Jew, and was forced to flee Germany. 
Salem turned itself over to the Hitler Youth, and the school had to be recreated in Scotland, at Gordonstoun, where 'Greece' received a slightly wider education.
It could easily have gone the other way. 
The presence of the young Prince Philip in Germany played to Hitler's interests, and several members of his family served the Third Reich.
Yet although Philip had strong ties both to his German relatives and to Greece (where he was briefly second in line to the throne), he felt most at home in England. 
The Milford Havens were his surrogate family, and when his closest friend Georgie Milford Haven died of cancer in 1938 he wrote in his diary the single word: 'Heartbroken.' 
It was one of many tragedies in his young life, and it seems to have resulted in what psychologists call a 'highly defended' personality - hard-nosed and screened against others' emotions.
His new mentor was his uncle, Lord Mountbatten. 
They were alike in many ways - forthright, undemonstrative, sometimes irritable, but also kind - and Philip became like a son to the great man.
A national treasure: Prince Philip's support for the Queen has earned him the nation's affection
It was at that time, July 1939, that the future Queen Elizabeth first set eyes on this glamorous figure. 
Since Greece was neutral in World War II he was forbidden active service until August 1940 when Greece joined the Allies; his first engagement, off Cape Matapan, effectively scuppered the Italian fleet and earned Philip a mention in dispatches.
There were other conquests to be made, during and after the War. 
Consummately eligible and dashingly handsome, Philip was connected to several beautiful women. 
One was dark-haired Canadian beauty Osla Benning, whom he squired around London; another, many years later, was Pat Kirkwood, a musical comedy star whose legs were pronounced 'the eighth wonder of the world'.
Both of them, and several other women known to have had trysts with Philip, have poured scorn on any rumours of an affair, claiming that back in those days women were either too ignorant or too well brought up to have sex - and Eade has to take their word for it.
Meanwhile, with the war at an end, Philip, with no particular place to go, was thrown back on his naval pay of around ?300 a year. 
To make ends meet, he would travel by bus and press his own trousers under the mattress at night.
One courtship was going great guns. 
Elizabeth had fallen for Philip almost from the day they met.
He was handsome, boisterous, somehow more vivid than other suitors the King and Queen had lined up for Lisbet, such as Hugh Euston, Johnny Dalkeith and the Duke of Marlborough. 
The courtiers, almost to a man, regarded Philip as 'no gentleman - hang it all, he hadn't even gone to Eton'. 
Philip's connection with the power-seeking Mountbattens did not make things easier; nor did the need for his naturalisation as British before he could be accepted by the public.
And though love conquered all, as the happy months after their Royal Wedding illustrated, being consort to the Queen, after George VI's death, was harder than Philip expected.
He had to accept numerous slights: friction with courtiers who found him abrasive, and the giving up of a house of their own to move into a flat in the Palace. 
Worst of all for him was that both Churchill and the Palace insisted on keeping the name House of Windsor, not changing it to Mountbatten or Battenburg. 
'I am the only man in the country not allowed to give his name to his children,' he raged. 
'I'm nothing but an amoeba!'
All this could have fostered a climate of bitterness between the couple. 
But there was none. 
Elizabeth rode the storms. Philip helped her overcome her shyness.
This balanced, sympathetic, engaging book deserves to take is place among the first rank of modern Royal biographies.
