2012 Person of the Year: Barack Obama, the President 
Twenty-seven years after driving from New York City to Chicago in a $2,000 Honda Civic for a job that probably wouldn't amount to much, Barack Obama, in better shape but with grayer hair, stood in the presidential suite on the top floor of the Fairmont Millennium Park hotel as flat screens announced his re-election as President of the United States. The networks called Ohio earlier than predicted, so his aides had to hightail it down the hall to join his family and friends. They encountered a room of high fives and fist pumps, hugs and relief.
The final days of any campaign can alter the psyches of even the most experienced political pros. 
At some point, there is nothing to do but wait. 
Members of Obama's team responded in the only rational way available to them -- by acting irrationally. They turned neckties into magic charms and facial hair into a talisman and compulsively repeated past behaviors so as not to jinx what seemed to be working. 
In Boca Raton, Fla., before the last debate, they dispatched advance staff to find a greasy-spoon diner because they had eaten at a similar joint before the second debate, on New York's Long Island. 
They sent senior strategist David Axelrod a photograph of the tie he had to find to wear on election night: the same one he wore in 2008. 
Several staffers on Air Force One stopped shaving, like big-league hitters in the playoffs. 
Even the President succumbed, playing basketball on Election Day at the same court he played on before winning in 2008.
But now it was done, and reason had returned. 
Ever since the campaign computers started raising the odds of victory from near even to something like surefire, Obama had been thinking a lot about what it meant to win without the lightning-in-a-bottle quality of that first national campaign. 
The Obama effect was not ephemeral anymore, no longer reducible to what had once been mocked as "that hopey-changey stuff." 
It could be measured -- in wars stopped and started; industries saved, restructured or reregulated; tax cuts extended; debt levels inflated; terrorists killed; the health-insurance system reimagined; and gay service members who could walk in uniform with their partners. 
It could be seen in the new faces who waited hours to vote and in the new ways campaigns are run. 
America debated and decided this year: history would not record Obama's presidency as a fluke.
So after his staff arrived, he left his family in the main room of the suite and stepped out to talk with his three top advisers, Axelrod, political strategist David Plouffe and Jim Messina, his campaign manager. 
He wanted to tell them what this victory meant, because it was very different the second time. 
"This one's more satisfying than '08," he said. 
"It wasn't just about what I was going to do as President. It's what I've done." 
In the end, the outcome would not even be very close, and this realization was sinking in, unleashing something, dropping a shield he had been carrying for a long time. 
Over three days in November, the man known for his preternatural cool won re-election and cried twice in public. 
And then, trying to find meaning in a tragedy in Connecticut, he did it again, all but breaking down in the White House Briefing Room.
In mid-December, as Obama settles into one of the Oval Office's reupholstered chairs -- brown leather instead of Bush's blue and gold candy stripes -- the validation of Election Day still hovers around him, suggesting that his second four years in office may turn out to be quite different from his first. 
Beyond the Oval Office, overwhelming challenges remain: deadlocked fiscal-cliff talks; a Federal Reserve that predicts years of high unemployment; and more unrest in places like Athens, Cairo and Damascus. 
But the President seems unbound and gives inklings of an ambition he has kept in check ever since he arrived at the White House to find a nation in crisis. 
He leans back, tea at his side, legs crossed, to explain what he thinks just happened. 
"It was easy to think that maybe 2008 was the anomaly," he says. 
"And I think 2012 was an indication that, no, this is not an anomaly. 
We've gone through a very difficult time. 
The American people have rightly been frustrated at the pace of change, and the economy is still struggling, and this President we elected is imperfect. 
And yet despite all that, this is who we want to be." 
He smiles. "That's a good thing."
The Campaign Team: David Simas ran Obama's opinion-research team, including focus groups; Stephanie Cutter managed the daily effort to defend Obama and dismantle Romney; David Axelrod, co-author of the Obama campaign story, oversaw the entire strategy from Chicago; Jim Messina, the campaign manager, designed, built and ran the whole campaign from scratch; Jim Margolis, the TV adman, relentlessly bombarded swing-state airwaves for months; Jeremy Bird, the grassroots organizer, created a smarter, larger Obama army than in 2008.
Two years ago, Republicans liked to say that the only hard thing Obama ever did right was beating Hillary Clinton in the primary, and in electoral terms, there was some truth to that. 
In 2012 the GOP hoped to cast him as an inspiring guy who was not up to the job. 
But now we know the difference between the wish and the thing, the hype and the man in the office. 
He stands somewhat shorter, having won 4 million fewer votes and two fewer states than in 2008. 
But his 5 million-vote margin of victory out of 129 million ballots cast shocked experts in both parties, and it probably would have been higher had so much of New York and New Jersey not stayed home after Hurricane Sandy. 
He won many of the toughest battlegrounds walking away: Virginia by 4 points, Colorado by 5 and the lily white states of Iowa and New Hampshire by 6. 
He untied Ohio's knotty heartland politics, picked the Republican lock on Florida Cubans and won Paul Ryan's hometown of Janesville, Wis. (Those last two data points especially caught the President's interest.) 
He will take the oath on Jan. 20 as the first Democrat in more than 75 years to get a majority of the popular vote twice. 
Only five other Presidents have done that in all of U.S. history.
There are many reasons for this, but the biggest by far are the nation's changing demographics and Obama's unique ability to capitalize on them. 
When his name is on the ballot, the next America -- a younger, more diverse America -- turns out at the polls. 
In 2008, blacks voted at the same rate as whites for the first time in history, and Latinos broke turnout records. 
The early numbers suggest that both groups did it again in 2012, even in nonbattleground states, where the Obama forces were far less organized. 
When minorities vote, that means young people do too, because the next America is far more diverse than the last. 
And when all that happens, Obama wins. 
He got 71% of Latinos, 93% of blacks, 73% of Asians and 60% of those under 30.
That last number is the one Obama revels in most. 
When he talks about the campaign, he likes to think about the generational shift the country is going through on topics like gay marriage -- an issue on which he lagged, only to reverse himself last spring. 
He connects it to the optimism he felt as a young man, the same thing he always talks about with staff in the limo or on the plane after visits with campaign volunteers. 
"The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice," reads one of the quotes stitched into his new Oval Office rug -- an old abolitionist cry that Martin Luther King Jr. repurposed while marching on Selma, Ala. 
Obama believes in that, and he believes he is more than just a bit player in the transition. 
"I do think that my eight years as President, reflecting those values and giving voice to those values, help to validate or solidify that transformation," he says, "and I think that's a good thing for the country."
Few experts predicted two years ago that Obama would be busy writing his second Inaugural Address. 
Pre-election polling showed depressed enthusiasm among young people and Latinos, for example, amid soaring interest among white evangelicals and the elderly. 
But the poll questions did not account for Obama's secret weapon: the people who don't much care for politics. 
A sizable chunk of the President's most ardent backers don't admire either party yet think Obama is somehow above it all, immune to all the horse trading and favor mongering that politics entails. 
These voters aren't political in the cable-TV sense of the word. 
But in 2012, they stuck by Obama. 
In the last month of the Obama campaign's voter registration, 70% of those signed up were women, minorities or people under 30.
The President feels a responsibility to advance the values he sees reflected in the changing electorate. 
Of the nearly 66 million people who pulled the lever for him, Obama says, "The choice that they made was less about me and more about them, more about who they saw themselves to be." 
It's a lovely sentiment for a winner, but even if Obama's right, the question now is, Who exactly do they want to be? 
And can Barack Obama take them there?
The Geek Squad: from left: Harper Reed, the chief technology officer, tweeted "My boss is awesome" after Obama won; Dan Wagner, the chief analytics officer, oversaw a team of number crunchers five times the size of the 2008 group; Dylan Richard engineered much of the software behind the campaign; Andrew Claster used analytics to develop new ways of targeting and predicting voter behavior.
The election that Obama won, as he has said repeatedly, was in the end a choice, not a referendum. 
He proved to be a better option than Mitt Romney, who was an imperfect candidate by most measures. 
On the issues, Obama did not fare quite as well. 
While 51% of voters in exit polls in 2008 said they wanted the government to do more, only 43% said so in 2012, and Obamacare still polls badly.
But Obama doesn't see his legacy in terms of an ideological imprint, like Ronald Reagan's claim that "government is the problem" or Bill Clinton's admonition that the "era of Big Government is over." 
He says he just wants smarter government and a set of results that he can claim as he leaves office in early 2017: "That we had steered this ship of state so that we once again had an economy that worked for everybody, that we had laid the foundation for broad-based prosperity and that internationally we had created the framework for continued American leadership in the world throughout the 21st century." 
Recent history and current headlines suggest he will fall short of achieving all those goals. 
But if he succeeds, it wouldn't be the first time this leader beat expectations.
Since the moment Obama arrived on the national scene in 2004, the very idea of leadership has been under assault. 
Many of the old institutions that once anchored the American Dream have been bled of public confidence. Banks, Big Business, the news media and Congress all polled at or near record lows during his first term. 
Obama himself was the target of uncommon vitriol, but he has somehow managed to keep the public's faith.
To understand how he kept his job, the best place to start is where he did. 
In early 2011, David Simas, a former registrar of deeds in Taunton, Mass., who had become a senior White House aide, switched on what might be called one of the largest listening posts in U.S. history. 
