The Generalissimo: Chiang Kai-shek and the Struggle for Modern China The China Theater (1) 
At dawn on November 21, 1943, the Generalissimo and Madame Chiang arrived by plane in Cairo for the conference with Roosevelt, Churchill, and assorted brass. 
Chennault, who had not been invited by the War Department and was attending as chief of staff of the Chinese Air Force, met the First Couple and escorted them to their villa. 
Madame Chiang was suffering from conjunctivitis and fatigue from the long journey and did not participate in a brief morning call on Churchill and Mountbatten, but at 6:30 in the evening both Chiangs had a meeting with the prime minister. 
Churchill was irritated with Roosevelt's idea that one of the four powers in the postwar world would be the poor, huge, anti-imperialist, anticolonialist, non-European nation of China, and he wanted to do as little as possible militarily in the Burma campaign. 
Still, Churchill recorded that he "was impressed by [Chiang's] calm, reserved, and efficient personality" and found Madame "most remarkable and charming." 
Chiang, after his initial encounters with the prime minister, pronounced him "calm and resolute" and thought, "No wonder he is the vanguard against Japan and the Communists." 
But after four days of talks he would change his mind. 
The conference opened the next day at the old Mena Hotel with its striking view of the pyramids. 
At the first plenary meeting of the three leaders, the Combined Chiefs, and various staff members, the only woman was Chiang Soong Mayling. 
The British chief of staff, Field Marshal Lord Alanbrooke, reports that as she shifted her legs about under her slit skirt he thought he heard "a suppressed neigh" coming from the younger officers. 
By contrast, Alanbrooke described her husband, the Chinese leader, as "a cross between a pine marten and a ferret" and on day one concluded he had "no grasp of war in its larger prospect." 
But Alanbrooke did not understand that Chiang believed he would resolve all the really important military and political matters affecting China directly with Roosevelt and that the other meetings were in no way decisive.
Mountbatten presented his operational plan for the offensive into North Burma, Operation Champion, which called for a much more restricted campaign than did the Stilwell plan approved by Chiang Kai-shek or what Roosevelt and others had promised the Chinese in Washington and elsewhere. 
Operation Champion did not come close to an "all-out air-land-and-naval effort" to open up the land route to China; instead it proposed only to secure a bridgehead across the Chindwin River and to make an airborne landing on the railway to Myitkyina. It was not at all clear what would happen next. 
The plan did include an amphibious landing, but only on the Andaman Islands, the occupation of which would do little to disrupt Japanese supply lines in Burma. 
In a critique provided to Mountbatten in October, Stilwell had criticized Operation Champion as "permeated by fear," and described the invasion of the Andamans as an "abortion."
During the opening session in Cairo, Mountbatten explained that Operation Champion would include an Allied force of 320,000 men, of whom 160,000 would be Indian and Burmese troops, 20,000 British special forces, 3,000 American special forces, and 137,000 Chinese soldiers from the divisions trained in India and Yunnan??the X and Y forces. 
Churchill surprisingly promised that the Royal Navy would send two large battleships, four large carriers, and ten small carriers to assure command of the Bay of Bengal. 
When it came his turn, Chiang was pleased but emphasized strongly again that a major amphibious operation and naval supremacy were essential, Mandalay rather than Myitkyina should be the target, and the Hump air transport operation should deliver 10,000 tons a months to China. 
Hopkins later wrote that Chiang was usually reluctant to commit himself on specific details.
But while the Chinese leader saved his real negotiations for his talks with Roosevelt, he also seemed concise and to the point in the joint meetings, and, it turned out, prescient regarding the likely size of the Japanese forces the Allies would encounter. 
Here is an abridged segment of Chiang's remarks at the November 23 session: "The success of the Burma operations depends not only on the strength of the naval forces established in the Indian Ocean but on the simultaneous coordination of naval action with the land operations. 
If the naval forces are not assembled, the mere concentration of land troops would not bring about sure victory . . . 
The forces the enemy could deploy in Burma could reach ten divisions and if we do not cut his line of reinforcement, his forces could be increased."
That evening, the Chiangs were Roosevelt's dinner guests at the residence of the American ambassador, where the President was staying. 
Hopkins was the only other guest. 
Madame, wearing her open-toed shoes and black silk qi pao, greeted her old friend of the past year, the President. 
Both sides had interpreters sitting nearby, but Mayling frequently corrected her husband's. 
The long evening of frank conversation reinforced Chiang's almost reverential feeling for Roosevelt as a statesman with a "transcendental bearing.
" Chiang's high, staccato voice and formal courtesy before an honored person of power, by contrast, did not stir feelings of camaraderie in the flamboyant, relaxed American.
In their long and serious evening discussion, however, the two men seemed to agree on virtually all matters. 
Chiang concurred with Roosevelt's view that Japan's future form of government should be left to the Japanese people and he proposed that reparations could be paid to China in Japanese industrial and war machinery, merchant ships, and other actual properties. 
He thought that America should be the largest occupying Allied power in Japan, but Roosevelt insisted that Chinese troops should play that role. 
Chiang also agreed with Roosevelt's "analysis of communism," stressing that Moscow could not be trusted, but said he would follow the President's lead on relations with the Soviet Union. 
Roosevelt firmly endorsed the return of Manchuria and Taiwan to China. 
As they had in their earlier correspondence, they also agreed on their vision of the postwar world, especially the need to end colonialism. 
In addition, Chiang mentions without giving details that the two leaders discussed Soviet participation in the war against Japan and the situation in Xinjiang. 
Chiang summed up the talk as "exceedingly satisfactory." Roosevelt had treated him "like an old friend."
The next morning, November 24, the President's son, Elliot, found his father breakfasting in bed and asked what was happening.
 "A lot," the President replied, "I've met the Generalissimo.
"When Elliot asked what he thought of the Chinese leader, his father first shrugged, and then said he had "learned more just talking to the Chiangs last night than I did from more than four hours of meeting with the Combined Chiefs." 
But while Chiang had described at some length the poor state of the Chinese Army, Roosevelt told his son some questions remained: "why Chiang's troops aren't fighting at all," why Chiang was "trying to stop Stilwell from training Chinese troops," and why he kept "thousands and thousands of his best men . . . on the borders of Red China." 
In sum, the President, reflecting his briefings, remained convinced that Chiang was inexplicably resisting General Stilwell's efforts to redress the problems facing the Chinese Army. 
Nevertheless, Roosevelt was "determined that Cairo be a success from the Chinese [that is, Chiang's] point of view."
The next day, Mountbatten called on the Generalissimo and Madame to explain why the more ambitious plan aiming for Mandalay was not possible for logistical reasons. 
Decades later, Mountbatten told Stilwell's biographer, Barbara Tuchman, that the Generalissimo evidently had not understood the term "monsoon," and that Madame Chiang had explained that the Generalissimo "does not know about monsoons." 
Tuchman refers twice to this story and asserts that China did not have monsoons, "ergo, he [Chiang] knew nothing of them," and further, that this exchange was "enlightening proof" of "Stilwell's difficulties with the Gimo." 
But Chiang's memos, letters, and diaries on many occasions refer to the "rainy season" (yu ji) in Burma and its obvious military implications. 
It seems that he was simply not familiar with the Portuguese-origin word "monsoon." 
In such a manner do seemingly revealing but totally misunderstood statements become part of a historic legend if they fit a preconceived stereotype. 
That afternoon, Mountbatten reported to the Combined Chiefs that Chiang had accepted the implication of reduced air support, was highly pleased with the British fleet that was to be made available, and would give the campaign his enthusiastic support.
But as with the word "monsoon," Mountbatten had also misunderstood Chiang, mistakenly believing that the Chinese leader was now enthusiastic about the overall British plan. 
Part of the problem was probably Mayling Soong's interpreting, in which she tried to make Chiang's remarks as positive as possible. 
Mountbatten's confusion was confirmed an hour or so later when Chiang had a private lunch with Marshall. 
In a level-headed discussion, Chiang told the American that he opposed the British plan because he was convinced it "would lead to heavy losses and possibly defeat." 
He repeated his call for an amphibious landing and added that the Chinese troops from Yunnan ¡®the Y Force¡¯ should not advance beyond Lashio. 
The U.S. record did not report any disagreement by Marshall. 
In fact, throughout the Cairo Conference, Marshall and the other American service chiefs would strongly support Chiang's insistence on the full implementation of the amphibious landing in Burma, Operation Buccaneer.
That evening, Churchill entertained the Chiangs at dinner. 
The prime minister surprised his guest by saying that the attack by sea could not take place before May 1944, by which time the rainy season would have begun. 
Otherwise, however, the dinner was another totally agreeable affair. 
That same evening Hopkins visited the Chiangs with the U.S. draft of the communique of the summit meeting. 
Chiang found in the draft "every opinion" he had mentioned to Roosevelt the previous night. 
He wrote that he was moved by Roosevelt's sincerity as expressed in the favorable communique.
