Meet the American Who Joined Mao's Revolution - War Is Boring - Medium 
Sidney Rittenberg greets me with a faint, friendly voice in the lobby of his condo building in Bellevue, Washington. 
Ninety three years old, wearing a striped blue polo shirt and khaki cargo pants, he walks slowly but appears remarkably healthy for his age.
If you didn't know his background, Rittenberg would come across as just another nonagenarian retiree in the Pacific Northwest. 
But he was the first American to join the Chinese Communist Party.
Once a U.S. Army linguist serving in China in the 1940s, he stayed behind after his enlistment ended, married twice, became a leader in the Cultural Revolution and spent 16 years in solitary confinement - and was once imprisoned because Joseph Stalin thought he was a spy.
The former apparatchik translated several of Mao Zedong's writings, knew the Chinese leader personally and survived the purges and internecine political bloodshed that later swept through the country.
Disillusioned and returning to America with his family, he started a new life and became a respected academic.
In a sweeping interview, Rittenberg talked about his life, what drew him to the revolutionary movement and why he became disillusioned with it. 
Thanks to his unique experiences, he probably knows China better than any American alive today.
Rittenberg and his wife, Yulin, recently sold their home on Fox Island in Pugent Sound and moved into this condo. 
They've had a little time to decorate, and the home is packed with boxes. 
Chinese artwork and photos fill the hallways.
"We're trying to downsize right now," Rittenberg says.
Sunlight shines through large windows overlooking a scenic view of downtown Bellevue, with a glimpse of Lake Washington glistening in the distance.
"The view is what sold us on this place." 
He introduces me to Yulin, who is unpacking a box. 
She offers us both tea. "Sit wherever you'll be comfortable," Rittenberg tells me. 
I take a seat on the couch in the living room. 
He gets comfortable in his rocking chair across from me.
As we sit and drink tea, his iPad sits on the coffee table between us, which he uses to keep up with current events. 
The years may have slowed him down physically, but not mentally. 
I tell him his experience with Chinese history is particularly unique.
"I wouldn't recommend most of it," he replies.
Into the East 
Rittenberg was born to a middle class Jewish family in Charleston, South Carolina. 
His involvement in political activism began there - in the Jim Crow South. 
"When I was 13 or 14, I witnessed some terrible police brutality against a young black guy," he recalls.
One night he witnessed a drunk white man attacking a black man, and ran to get the police. 
When the cops arrived on the scene, they attacked the black man on the ground instead of his white attacker. 
Later, the young Rittenberg asked his aunt about it, wanting to know how the justice system could allow what he'd seen.
"She told me there was no such thing as justice, that you only get as much justice as you can pay for," he says, which shocked him. 
"I'd grown up on stories where good always triumphed ? I believed there had to be justice."
Rittenberg turned down a scholarship to Princeton and studied philosophy at the University of North Carolina. 
Moved by the conditions of local mill workers, he spent much of his early adulthood as a Southern labor and civil rights activist.
But after the outbreak of World War II, he was drafted into the Army and sent to Stanford's Army Far Eastern Language and Area School to learn Japanese. 
When he arrived, he chose to learn Chinese instead - believing that learning Japanese would mean serving in the lengthy post-war occupation.
He wanted to return to the United States - and his labor activism - as soon as he possibly could. 
He thought China would be a nice short adventure. 
He wouldn't return to America for more than three decades.
After his training and a journey across the Pacific, he and several linguists flew over "the Hump" from India to Kunming, China. 
Their assignment - work with the American-allied Kuomintang government and assist with the post-war civil administration.
China was indeed a beautiful country and a new adventure. 
But the stench of hunger, poverty and corruption dampened the young southerner's enthusiasm. 
Soon after he and his fellow troops arrived, they met a band of Kuomintang troops who offered to get them some female companionship.
"They told us that for a dollar, they would go to a nearby village and bring back Chinese girls that they could guarantee would be virgins," Rittenberg says. "For one U.S. dollar, they would just grab some girl - everyone knew about it but nobody did anything to stop it."
Officials hoarded food, money and supplies while peasants starved and toiled. 
It was common to see corpses rotting along the roadside. 
Officials casually joked to him and the other Americans about robbing and torturing people.
"There was no incentive not to be corrupt - you almost had to be," he reflects. 
Government employees demanded bribes and kickbacks from common people f0r the most basic services. 
"It was routine, people expected it."
One of the worst experiences was his investigation into the death of a 12-year-old Chinese girl named Li Muxian. 
A drunk American sergeant ran her down after a night of partying.
The G.I. had picked up a dancing girl at a club the night before, and woke up to find himself AWOL with a splitting headache. 
He took a few shots of whiskey and drove back to base. 
He saw Li by the road and thought it would be funny to scare her.
"I said to myself I'm going to see how close I can get to that little slopey girl and goddamn if I didn't run her over," the sergeant said in his deposition.
Investigators sent Rittenberg to interview witnesses, including the girl's father. "Our life is nothing," the father said. "It is nothing but eating bitterness. 
She was all we had. 
We were hoping she would have something better."
In his report, Rittenberg recommended the Army provide the highest possible compensation, but the assistant claims officer reduced it to $26. 
Rittenberg was mortified. 
He told the officer that the Army had reimbursed a villager $150 for a horse not long before.
The officer told him that the estimate was based on burial costs and what a person added to family income. 
A small child earned no income and needed a just a small coffin, the officer reasoned. 
A horse has a price tag - a human life doesn't.
Rittenberg delivered the $26 to the girl's father, feeling disgusted. 
Later that day, the man arrived in his office. 
The peasant had brought $6 back. 
The American was confused.
The American linguist realized the man saw him as part of the corrupt Chinese bureaucracy. 
The peasant felt obligated to give a kickback to every official who helped him receive the meager compensation. 
Rittenberg refused to take the money, and sent the man on his way.
The experience haunted him for years.
Exploring China 
It was in Southwest China that Rittenberg began reading local newspapers - including underground newspapers glorifying the exploits of communist guerrillas in the north.
Many newsstands carried these papers secretly, and the locals treated the guerrillas like folk heroes. 
"They seemed to be practicing honest government, and government that was somewhat democratic," he says.
Around the same time, Rittenberg befriended several communists. 
They shared meals, drank together and listened to music. 
They told him stories about underground revolutionary activities in Shanghai. 
He requested a transfer to Shanghai for the remainder of his enlistment. 
His superior officers pulled some strings ? and he was on his way.
Shanghai was a bustling international hub. "It was a chamber of horrors to me," Rittenberg says. 
It was a decadent town - everything frightening about the corruption in Southwest China was amplified in this port city.
"Nanking Road, which was the main stretch, was always crowded with people," he says. "Most of them were hookers and their pimps." 
The opulence of the nightclubs clashed with the abject poverty and starvation on the streets. 
"You could hardly go anywhere without running into at least one body on the street."
One morning, he opened the front door of his military lodging and found a corpse. 
"He was just sitting there, he'd frozen to death the night before," he recalls.
He asked a Chinese policeman why nobody did anything about the bodies. 
The cop explained to him that anyone who touched them would become responsible for the burial costs - so everyone would ignore it.
He took on a freelance assignment for an American press outlet investigating Shanghai's prostitution rackets. 
He learned that most of the prostitutes were sold to brothels from struggling rural families.
"A lot of them were just children," he reflected with a hint of sadness.
Shanghai was bad. 
But it wasn't all bad. 
Rittenberg met Soong Qingling, widow of the revolutionary Sun Yatsen. 
Both communists and nationalists revere Sun as the father of modern China, and Madame Soong was a power in her own right.
"She was a very handsome lady with a lot of poise and presence," Rittenberg recalls. 
She introduced him to pro-democracy activists and artists in the city. 
Soong herself was a leftist sympathizer, and joined the communists after they took power a few years later.
Following his discharge from the Army, she became one of Rittenberg's mentors and helped him stay in China. 
He went to work for the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, where he accounted for aid meant to alleviate famine.
But as he traveled through the country, he witnessed more corruption and more abuse - even by fellow U.N. employees.
"We had flour coming in donated by the English speaking countries," he says. "[But] the rule was all relief went to the local Kuomintang benevolence association and they would give it out." 
Unsurprisingly, these associations were often corrupt. "They would put it in their back pocket," he explains. "They'd sell it for profit, exporting to places like Manila or Singapore. 
We would often end up buying back our own relief agency's flour."
The scale of corruption, in Rittenberg's view, had a lot to do with driving people into the communist movement. 
The nationalists hoarded American aid and centralized their power in the cities, while the communists won popular support in the countryside.
At one point, he visited a town called Fresh Flower Village, where communists and nationalists were negotiating under the eyes of American officers. 
The nationalists had blocked aid to the communist-held village.
U.S. Gen. George C. Marshall - America's top Army officer during World War II - was in China brokering the negotiations. 
He ordered the nationalists to end the blockade.
However, an American general told Rittenberg that when the Americans left, the nationalists would return and wipe out the village. 
It flew in the face of the stated U.S. policy of working to form a coalition government between the two factions.
The general's attitude disturbed him.
A U.S. Army colonel took over the negotiations, and Rittenberg didn't believe he knew of the scheme. 
But the American aid worker became increasingly distrustful of official statements.
He believed the U.S. government was lying to both the American and Chinese people - and acted in a way he considered un-American.
Meeting Mao
 Unable to handle the corruption, Rittenberg left his job at UNRRA in the fall of 1946.
He wasn't the only one.
The Kuomintang's excesses led increasing numbers of Americans in China to sympathize with the communists. 
"But probably not to the extent that I did."
