Milan Kundera's denunciation
Milan Kundera has always carefully covered his tracks.
He has given no interviews for the past quarter of a century.
He visits his native country only incognito and stays in hotels under assumed names.
He has sworn his Czech friends to silence, so not even they are willing to speak to journalists about who Milan Kundera is and was. 
A murky and convoluted story has now accidentally surfaced from the past of the best known Czech writer. 
It indicates that there may be other reasons for his reclusiveness than we previously imagined.
The fourteenth of March 1950. Two years have just elapsed since the Communist putsch.
For over six months now Milada Horakova has been held in Ruzyn¡§¡ì prison, and subjected to interrogations and torture. 
Her trial is due to take place in a month's time and in three months' time she will be executed together with her co-defendants.
In various police stations in Prague the first interrogations of ten world-champion ice-hockey players, arrested yesterday evening for "public incitement against the the Republic" are already under way.
They will be convicted of high treason and sentenced to lengthy terms of imprisonment, some of it spent in the uranium mines near Jachymov.
Over ten thousand people are already interned in the camps there.
It was on 14 March 1950 that the paths of two young men, Miroslav Dvo?¨¢?ek and Milan Kundera, crossed for the first and last times.
The former escaped a death sentence only by a whisker and spent many years in prisons and labour camps.
The latter was soon to become a rising star of "constructive" (i.e. pro-communist) literature, who then gradually emerged as one of the key Czech intellectuals of the 1960s and a world-renowned author.
For fifty-eight long years Milan Kundera was probably the only actor in the drama of those days who who knew what actually happened at the "Kolonka" student hall of residence in the Letna district of Prague.
It was not until the spring of this year that a typewritten official document unexpectedly fell out of the archives of the Communist security agencies and shed light on the long-forgotten incident.
But let us take things in the proper order.
The end of a dream
Miroslav Dvo?¨¢?ek was born in 1928 at Kostelec nad Orlici, a small town in Eastern Bohemia, into the family of a civil servant.
While at gymnasium (secondary school) he made friends with Miroslav Juppa, a boy of his own age, who had transferred to the school in Kostelec when the gymnasium at nearby Rychnov was closed by the occupation authorities. 
The two young men were to share the same ambition - to become airmen.
The Czechs' wartime humiliation combined with the heroism of Czech pilots flying with the RAF caused their juvenile yearning to become a firm determination.
After leaving school they were both gained entrance to the Air Force Academy at Hradec Kralove.
The year was 1947.
"I can remember how happy they were to be accepted. 
They had set their hearts on going there," recalls their common friend Iva Militka, who plays a crucial role in the story. 
Miroslav Dvo?¨¢?ek she had known since childhood, Juppa she had fallen in love with when they were both at school and had started to go out together. "Sometimes he'd fly over our house and wave to me with with the plane's wings," the now 79-year-old lady recounts. 
The two young men's happiness was to be short-lived, however. 
After the Communist putsch in February 1948 a purge of the armed forces was carried out and the air force was particularly affected. 
Forty percent of the officers were former members of the British RAF, who hated the new regime. 
The pilots were demoted as unreliable and enemies of socialism, dismissed from the forces and sent to labour camps. 
Students didn't escape the effects of the purges either. 
The class that Juppa and Dvo?¨¢?ek attended was disbanded. 
They were stripped of their rank, weapons and permission to fly," Iva Militka recalls and the dry officialese of the documents preserved in the archives bear out her statement. 
"The named students of the Air Force Academy must be immediately expelled from Academy not only in view of their negative attitude to the democratic system of our state but also of their open opposition to the state and the Party," reads the HQ memorandum dated 20 January 1949 relating to the purges carried out in Year III of the Academy to which both friends belonged. 
In February, the young men received orders to transfer to the infantry regiment in Plze¡§? and they left the barracks. 
They did not report to the infantry regiment, however.
Realising there was no way out of their situation and that their future was uncertain, the two had already decided to flee to the West and join the air force there. 
They stopped off at their homes to pick up civilian clothes and then went to Prague where they were hidden for several days by some relatives of Iva Militka's. "I paid them several visits and took them food. 
They told me they were due to be smuggled across the frontier in several days' time. 
We said brief farewells.
At the time I was still planning to join them abroad," she recalls. 
The two men then bought a map and a compass in Prague and crossed unnoticed into the western zone of Germany through the thick Bohemian Forest. 
The Communist who didn't parade
At the same time and in the same country Milan Kundera's life was taking a totally different course. 
He grew up in Brno, the Moravian capital, surrounded by books, in the family of the well-known musicologist, musician and scholar Ludvik Kundera. 
By the time he was attending secondary school, he was already outstripping his peers in terms of erudition, education and outlook. 
He shared the prevailing enthusiasm for the idea of socialism and admiration for Stalin's Soviet Union. 
"For the generation that grew up around the time of the war it was very hard not to fall prey to that illusion," Kundera's fellow-writer Ivan Klima explains. 
Klima experienced the youthful infatuation with Communism at first hand, but unlike Kundera he is prepared to reflect on it: "We grew up cut off from information. 
Even in the years from 1945 to 1948 no one dared to write the truth about Stalin although people were already aware of his crimes. 
For the young left-wing intellectuals of those days, Stalin was the one who ended the war and socialism represented hope of a better world."
Milan Kundera joined the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (KS?) and penned poetry and song texts in the spirit of the socialist ardour of those days. "Our friendship arcs across the sky like a rainbow. 
The Soviet Union and our country will be together for ever and ever. 
Our friendship towers over us like a rocky peak above the waves. 
The warmongers will crack their skulls against that rock," run the words of one of the songs for which Kundera supplied the words. 
These days it sounds menacing, but the poet's friends from that period all concur that in left-wing cultural circles of the forties and fifties, the talented Brno intellectual was one of the more critical devotees of Stalinism. 
The erudite aesthete loathed mass shenanigans and he apparently did not even attend May Day parades. 
He tried to provide a rational explanation for his attitude to Communism. "Milan was a totally different type of person from me," the writer Pavel Kohout recalls. 
In the fifties Kohout was a prominent Stalinist propagandist, although he subsequently became a founder of Charter 77 and a dissident. "He was a very withdrawn and pernickety person, but that doesn't mean he didn't truly believe in the ideas of socialism. 
It simply that everyone expressed themselves differently."
In 1948 Kundera moved from Brno to Prague and enrolled at the film academy to study direction. 
"I've sat on many admissions boards in my time but only twice in my life did it happen that a candidate walked in and it was immediately obvious that he stood head and shoulders above the rest," recalls the director Antonin Kachlik, then an active member of the Party and head of the student council, who was an intimate friend of Kundera's. 
"That incredible erudition, breadth of outlook and conceptual thinking - that is something one rarely came across." 
The young Communist intellectual soon made a name for himself in the film faculty and the Prague cafes. 
Happy days at "Kolonka" 
At that time Iva Militka was also enjoying her carefree student days beneath the red banner. 
Juppa, her boyfriend from school days, had disappeared abroad with his friend Dvo?¨¢?ek, and she had enrolled at Charles University to study German and Scandinavian languages. 
"A new world opened up to me in Prague," she recalls. 
"I was given accommodation at the "Kolonka" hall of residence. 
I had a little single room with a cherry tree outside the window that used to blossom. 
I spent the happiest days of my life there."
Militka came to the university after the main wave of Bolshevik purges, during which a quarter of all the students and a thousands of teachers had been expelled. 
There chiefly remained loyal Communists, and life at the student residences was like an idyll of "socialist construction". 
The young student soon fell prey to the infectious ideology too (but she never joined the party). 
"I expect these days no one would understand," she says, in an effort to describe the atmosphere at "Kolonka", "but I can remember, for instance, taking a walk on Pet?in Hill with a fellow student. 
We stopped and chatted and he dreamed about how Czechoslovakia would one day become one of the union republics of the USSR".
Not long after, a student of aesthetics and a fervent young Communist by the name of Miroslav Dlask would become part of her idyll. 
They got to know each other at a student work camp in Ostrava and were soon going out together. 
Dlask's father, a social democrat, had survived Auschwitz, and the young student enthusiastically held forth to his new love about how humanism would emerge victorious only through the unity of social democracy and Communism. 
Dlask also introduced his new girlfriend to his like-minded friends. 
One of his closest friends was a student at the film academy, the charismatic intellectual Milan Kundera. 
Iva Militka decided at that time that she would no longer be emigrating to join her one-time boyfriend Juppa.
The mission of General Moravec 
The Leopold Barracks refugee camp in Munich was far removed from that Prague student idyll. 
The international network of refugee camps then used the space of former concentration camps and barracks, into which 150,000 people were crammed. 
The conditions prevailing there were dreadful. 
The Czech emigres who left after the Communist putsch of February 1948 suffered harassment at the hands of the expelled Sudeten Germans, and the intelligence services of the Communist and western countries vied with each other in luring refugees to work as secret agents.
Miroslav Dvo?¨¢?ek and Miroslav Juppa had no doubts about which side they wanted to work for. 
They underwent interrogation by the US army Counter-Intelligence Corps (CIC), in the course of which they described the Hradec Kralove barracks, including the number of aircraft and personnel, and their training, and they drew maps of the airfields. 
In mid-November 1949, they were invited to an unassuming villa not far from the refugee camp at Ulm. 
There they met General Franti?ek Moravec, war hero and legendary head of military intelligence, who offered them work for "the American-supported Czechoslovak intelligence services". 
They were to work as couriers and carry out missions in Czechoslovakia that would help restore democracy. 
The young pilots accepted on condition that General Moravec would subsequently see they were reinstated in the air force.
