Edward Kennedy
Edward Kennedy - the last survivor of the three Kennedy brothers who left an indelible political mark on their age - has died at the age of 77. 
Though the manifest flaws in his character cost him the American presidency in 1980, time and circumstance ensured that his eventual contribution to his compatriots' welfare could well prove to be his enduring legacy, eclipsing the memory of his turbulent private life and the scandal surrounding the death of Mary Jo Kopechne at Chappaquiddick in 1969.
His death marks the end of five decades in which the brothers had symbolised the progressive impulses of the Democratic party. 
He was first elected to Congress by Massachusetts voters in 1962, and eventually achieved the second-longest Senate term in US history. 
This enabled him to create an unrivalled legislative record, dealing with such concerns as healthcare, education and training, safety at work and a wide range of other social concerns. 
His remarkable capacity for work and his pragmatism in securing a consensus among his colleagues won him wide respect from both parties.
In May 2008 Kennedy collapsed at his home and was found to have a malignant brain tumour. 
He underwent immediate surgery, followed by radiation treatment and chemotherapy. 
To the astonishment of delegates, he made an appearance at the Democratic convention in Denver, Colorado, in August to express his strong support for Barack Obama as the party's presidential nominee, having endorsed his candidacy the previous January at a crucial stage in the campaign.
With the scar from his surgery clearly evident, and with many delegates in tears, Kennedy mounted the podium to produce an echo of the remarkable speech he had made at the 1980 New York convention, when his campaign against President Jimmy Carter for the Democratic nomination collapsed. 
In a strong voice, he told the audience in Denver that "this November, the torch will be passed to a new generation of Americans. 
The work begins anew, the hope rises again and the dream lives on." 
It was a tacit acknowledgment that his own part in the process was drawing to a close.
Edward Moore Kennedy, widely known as Ted, was the youngest of Joseph and Rose Kennedy's nine children, a factor that was important in the development of his complex and contradictory personality. 
At his birth, his nearest sibling, Jean, was four and his eldest brother, Joseph, was nearly 17. 
The boy turned out to be a good-natured child who, with the increasing absence of his father and brothers, was treated with the utmost indulgence by his mother and sisters. 
He commented in later life that those early years had passed "having a whole army of mothers around me".
When he was six, his father's appointment as ambassador to Britain brought a traumatic change to this secure and sheltered domestic scene. 
After the move to London, the child never seemed to be allowed to establish himself anywhere. 
By the end of the second world war, when he was 13, he had attended 10 different schools. 
He privately acknowledged that the emotional effect of this disruption was to leave him with virtually no recollection of his life between the ages of seven and 18. 
His aviator brother Joe was killed in action in France in 1944, and Edward became increasingly conscious of the heightened expectations his parents had of their remaining sons.
The family's history since it fled the Irish famine in 1848 had been one of relentless material and political advance. 
Grandfather Patrick Kennedy, a Boston saloon keeper, had been elected to the Massachusetts state legislature at the early age of 27. 
From that vantage point, he shrewdly harnessed his new influence in the struggle against the dominant Yankee establishment. 
His mastery of wheeling and dealing soon gave him political control of the impoverished Irish area of east Boston. 
With the power to deliver the voters of this fiefdom to Boston's Democratic party machine, Patrick's advance was spectacular.
He became a state senator and then moved into a variety of appointed offices in the city at what was then the enormous salary of $5,000 a year. 
From there he advanced steadily up the party ladder and was soon accepted as one of Boston's most powerful figures. 
Within a decade, using bribery, dead men's votes, intimidation and any other weapon that came to hand, the Irish factions gained control of Boston. 
They have never lost it.
In spite of this political success, Patrick realised that a social gulf remained. 
He decided to send his son Joseph - Edward's father - to the Boston Latin school, attended by most of the children of the city's elite families. 
Young Joseph was not academically successful there, but his talent as a baseball player led to a number of useful friendships. 
When his attempt to replicate this process at Harvard University failed, his father used his political clout by securing him a place in the college basketball team.
The pattern of the Kennedy clan had thus been established - to win any struggle it undertook without bothering too much about the means. 
This pattern was heightened when Joseph Kennedy, in a series of extremely risky deals, bludgeoned his way into the tightly controlled Boston banking community and then, as a figure of growing consequence, married Rose Fitzgerald, the mayor of Boston's daughter.
His bride was as steeped in local politics as her new husband, having often acted as her father's hostess and grown accustomed to the pressures and accommodations his position entailed. 
This was the atmosphere in which their rapidly growing family was raised. 
Both parents stressed to their children the importance of winning. Merely to try their best was not enough.
It was an affluent life, though the source of Joseph's fortune has never been wholly clear. 
While some of it was acquired through bootlegging during prohibition in the 1930s, other elements came more legitimately from the film industry and complex stock market manipulations. 
It meant the family was never concerned about its material wellbeing. 
It had three large homes and the children benefited from trust funds established by their father that would reach $10m apiece in his lifetime.
This wealth also enabled Joseph to buy as much political influence from the Franklin Delano Roosevelt administration as he wanted (including the London ambassadorship). 
The effect on his youngest son of growing up in this amoral climate soon became apparent. 
Like his brothers, Edward had inherited his father's sporting prowess. 
By the time he began at Harvard in 1950, he was more than six feet tall, weighed 15 stone and had become a notable player of American football.
He was keen to join the university team but was hampered by a poor record in his studies. 
Unlike other US universities, Harvard made sporting advancement dependent on a sound academic performance. 
Faced with a Spanish examination he was sure he would fail, Kennedy paid a more adept friend to take it for him. 
To the chagrin of his family, the plot was discovered and he was expelled, though the incident was covered up for more than a decade.
With his exemption from military service now void, he was conscripted into the army from 1951 to 1953. 
The family appeared to regard his brief service career as a form of punishment and made no effort to ease his lot. 
He never got beyond the rank of private and in his biographical listings, that period was dismissed in four words.
There was, however, clearly considerable negotiation going on behind the scenes, because he was allowed to return to Harvard after his military discharge. 
Possibly as a reaction to military discipline, his increasingly erratic temperament began to emerge. 
To the horror of his team-mates in a football match against a side from New York, he was sent off after three times starting fights on the field. 
He did not like being bested.
Although he got a BA in government at Harvard (1956), he failed to qualify for its law school and enrolled instead at that of the University of Virginia. 
He again jeopardised his career there with a series of motoring offences, including jumping a red light on a suburban street at 90mph. 
However, he graduated as a bachelor of law in 1959 and was immediately admitted to the Massachusetts bar.
Just before graduation he had met and married Joan Bennett, but even with a wife to support, he was hardly in need of a paying job. 
Kennedy had started to benefit from his father's trust fund and, having acted as manager of his older brother John's 1958 Senate re-election campaign, was now recruited for the next stage of the family's grand plan, John's bid for the White House. 
For the most part he was sent to work in the western states, most of them hopeless prospects with a long history of voting Republican.
It fell to his brother Robert to control the central campaign, in which John scraped into the White House in 1960 as the country's first Roman Catholic president by a margin of 113,000 votes out of 69m. 
His victory was subsequently attributed to large-scale ballot rigging by the Chicago mayor Richard Daley's Irish-run administration. 
The episode starkly underlined an adage of Thomas "Tip" O'Neill, one of the Kennedy family's closest allies in Boston and later speaker of the House of Representatives. 
In the end, he declared, all politics was local. 
It was a lesson Edward Kennedy absorbed, and would underpin his entire political career.
With John as president (and Robert his attorney general), the Massachusetts Senate seat fell vacant, but Edward was still two years below the minimum legal age to take over. 
So it was held by a nominee until the Kennedys could reclaim it in the 1962 election. 
Edward won the remainder of John's term by an overwhelming majority, partly through crude hints that the family would now be able to shower the state with federal largesse.
A year later JFK was assassinated. 
Edward was in the Senate chamber when the news was brought to him. 
He gathered his papers silently and left the chamber to discover more. 
But the Washington telephone system had collapsed under the weight of calls, and he arrived at the family home in Hyannis still unclear about the precise circumstances of his brother's death. 
His father was by now frail and bedridden and it fell to Edward and his sister Eunice to break the news to him the following morning.
In the private turmoil that followed the murder, the senator's public life had to continue. 
He was obliged to fight once more for his newly won seat because its six-year term had expired. 
While criss-crossing the state to gather support, his private plane crashed. 
Kennedy was the only passenger who had not fastened his seat belt, and he sustained six spinal fractures and two broken ribs. 
He spent six months in hospital and never wholly shook off the effects of the injuries.
But the combination of Kennedy money and widespread sympathy for the family ensured an easy victory, and his political career hit its stride. 
There was, of course, considerable hostility between the remaining brothers and President Lyndon Johnson, and the vehicle for its expression became the Vietnam war. 
Edward joined with Robert - who had secured one of New York's Senate seats in the 1964 election - to focus the country's increasing disenchantment with the conflict.
As American troops became mired more deeply, Robert announced he would fight Johnson for the 1968 Democratic presidential nomination. 
Within days, the president withdrew from the contest and Robert looked certain to be the party's candidate. 
He had just won his sixth primary, in California, when he, too, was assassinated. 
It had a cataclysmic effect on Edward, now the only remaining brother.
At the funeral he gave a short, spontaneous address which many felt was the most moving speech of his life. 
