D.H.Lawrence: a Life of an Outsider
Lawrence's Early Life
D.H.Lawrence was born in 1885; the house where he was born is in a row of miner's houses: redbrick, grimy, two-up two-down, just thirteen feet wide, with a shop window. 
It probably looks more attractive today, as a museum, thanit has at any time in the last one hundred and thirty years.
In letters, essays, novels, stories, plays, and poems, Lawrence returned over and over again to those much loved landscapes which lay in the curve of the river Erewash where it divides Notinghamshire from Derbyshire. All the fields, streams, and houses which made up what he called 'the country of my heart'.
Lawrence's mother, Lydia, and his father Arthur, first met each other at a party. 
Lydia was immediately drawn to the handsome, strong-bodied miner. 
They were married in 1875, a few months after their first meeting, and moved to the house in Victoria Street, Eastwood very soon afterwards. 
During the next twelve years Lydia Lawrence gave birth to two daughters and three sons. 
David Herbert was the youngest of the sons and the youngest but one in the family.
The marriage was not many months old before the pledge of total abstinence from drink given by the husband in the first flush of romantic ardor was broken. 
Arthur was often careless at work and had to stay away due to injuries. 
This, together with the fact that his insolence to his immediate superiors resulted in him rarely getting a stall to work, further depleted the family's meager income. 
In Lydia's embittered mind the image of the handsome man she had met and fallen in love with faded rapidly, to be replaced by that of a selfish, drunken, penny-pinching boor. 
And this was how she made the children see their father too.
The quarrels between the parents became a dreaded family part of the children's lives. 
To get as far as possible, physically and socially, away from the ordinary miner's home was only a small, though important step in Lydia's struggle to prevent her sons from following their father's footsteps down the mine. 
The most powerful weapon the mother had was education and wielded it with ruthless and sustained efficiency. 
Therefore, the young Lawrence grew up under the rough treatment of his mother.
Education and the way to be a writer
Altogether Lawrence spent four years as a pupil teacher at Eastwood and Ilkeston. 
At the end of 1904, he sat for the King's Scholarship examination, and he passed it and qualified for a free place at a training college. 
Six months later he passed the London Matriculation examination, which qualified him for admission to Nottingham University College. 
But he did not have the money for his earnings for his fees, so he taught for a further year at Eastwood, putting aside most of his earnings to pay for his future expenses. 
It was in September of 1906, at the age of twenty-one, Lawrence entered the Nottingham University College to follow the teachers' training course. 
He had already begun working on the novel which was known as The White Peacock.
Once he planned to take an external degree in Arts of London University, but he went back to his original course of studies when he found himself unable to obtain extra tuition in Latin. 
Lawrence enjoyed neither his teaching practice nor the formal education he was receiving at Nottingham. 
It had meant mere disillusion instead of the living contact of .
Lawrence was determined that he would at least name his own price. 
He would not take any teaching job that paid less than 90 pounds a year. 
After one or two disappointments, he found a job in the newly opened Davidson Road School at Croydon. 
But he did not enjoy his years at Croydon, though he worked under a headmaster who let him teach in his own way. 
Here, he had one colleague who shared his passion for literature and ideas. 
At the beginning he suffered from intense homesickness and several of his earliest published poems deal with this theme. 
When this had worm off he still found he could not believe enough in what he was doing to commit himself wholeheartedly to it.
At this period, without his mother's encouragement, he would probably not have become a schoolteacher (as she herself had been). 
And he had become one, he felt frustrated and ill at ease, both because he found the daily drudgery and particularly maintenance of discipline in the classroom irksome, and also because his emotional affairs were in a state of uncertainty. 
But through out the petty frustrations of his job and his emotional restlessness, the ambition of being a writer remained constant. 
So he worked steadily at The White Peacock, and also wrote several poems.
Lawrence still corresponded with Jessie when he taught at Croydon, and sent her the various installments of his novel as well as some poems. 
It was Jessie who introduced him to the editor Ford. Later Ford invited Lawrence to visit him in London.
It was through Ford that Lawrence gained admission to the literary world of metropolitan London. 
As a writer, Lawrence seems to have known almost from the very beginning the path he wished to follow. 
With his first novel and some of the subsequent ones he showed a great readiness to chop and chant, and he was seeking advice not only from literary men such as Ford, but also from friends and acquaintances like Jessie. 
As Lawrence said I had to write, because he wanted the people, the English people to become brainier.
But while he was willing and even eager to shape his early work to suit the fashions and taboos of the Edwardian literary and publishing world, he was always clear-sighted as to just what he was doing, and, on some matters, quite adamant.
It took Lawrence three years to get The White Peacock into its final form, and the novel was not published until early in 1911. 
But before he was able to obtain a copy especially bound up to put into the hands of his beloved mother who was dying of cancer.
Mrs. Lawrence died in December 1910, and Lawrence did very little writing during that year, though before his first novel was published he had written early versions of both The Trespasser and Sons and Lovers. 
About his mother's death, he wrote:
For me, everything collapsed, save the mystery of death, and haunting of death in life. 
I was twenty-five, and from the death of my mother, the world began to dissolve around me, beautiful, iridescent, but passing away substance less. 
Till I almost dissolved away myself, and was very ill. (A Preface to D. H. Lawrence 29) 
Frieda Weekley and Lawrence
Frieda Weekley was Lawrence's French Professor's wife; she first met Lawrence in 1912 when Lawrence visited them. 
And this year, Frieda was thirty-two, Lawrence was twenty-seven. As she put it, Lawrence was "A long thin figure, quick straight legs, and light sure movement. 
He seemed so obviously simple."
Frieda, she herself was a well-built, attractive woman. 
A love of company and a capacity for enjoyment made her felt unfulfilled after her marriage. 
Disappointed in her existence as a provincial bourgeois housewife, she had sunk, after twelve years of marriage, into a kind of sleepwalking through the days.
By the standards of her day, she was an emancipated woman with very liberal ideas and a forthright way of expressing them.
An emancipated woman, and a talented writer, there must be a story that destined to happen between them. 
They fell in love with each other. The flowing quotation could prove their story.
Oh, but she is the woman of a lifetime. (The Collection of Lawrence's Letters 37) 
I love you. Let us face anything, put up with anything. 
But this crawling under the mud I cannot bear. (A Preface to D. H. Lawrence 33)
I didn't want people, I didn't want anything, and I only wanted to revel in this new world Lawrence had given me. (A Preface to D. H. Lawrence 33)
The world is wonderful and beautiful and good beyond one's wildest imagination. 
Never, never, never could one conceive what love is, beforehand, never. 
Life can be great-quite good-like. 
It can be so. 
God be thanked I have proved it. (A Preface to D. H. Lawrence 33) 
Through their words we could see how much they loved each other.On 3 May 1912, Lawrence and Frieda left England for Germany.
But their happiness was not entirely unclouded. 
Frieda's husband refused to give her a divorce and the news that her children were unhappy made Frieda tense with grief and anxiety. 
She had gone back to look after her sister's children and Lawrence fretted at their separation and her longing. 
There were many bitter quarrels.
By the late June 1914, Lawrence and Frieda were reunited in England; they were married on 13 July 1914. 
And he wrote to Mrs. Hopkin: 
I don't feel a changed man, but I suppose I am one. (The Collection of Lawrence's Letters 158)
During the War Years
In England at war, from 1914 to 1915, these two years was the hardest time for Lawrence.
He would have taken some time returning home to London. 
On 3 August 1914, the decision to mobilize was taken; the government announced that the bank holiday was being extended to Friday morning, and the state took over the railway system for troop transports. 
Vast numbers of army reservists were being called up, as Lawrence had seen. 
When he did get back he found everything changing with astonishing speed.
To prove it, he received back the typescript of 'The Wedding Ring' from his publisher. 
Methuen had returned the novel, like most of their recently submitted fiction, to be resubmitted in six months' time. 
When they hoped the economic and business situation would have stabilized, though they also made some criticisms of the book's sexual outspokenness.
This meant that it would be months before Lawrence would get themoney due on its publication, on which he had been relying. 
He and Frieda had been spending a great deal since June; they had run through the advance.
The outbreak of war made it impossible for the moment to go back to the Continent and the projected trip to Ireland did not materialize. 
All they could do was find somewhere cheap to live outside London, where Lawrence could write his Hardy book and they could wait for the war to end.
What is going to become of us? 
It seems like another life. 
We were happy, for men?ก่?ก่?ก่?ก่?ก่?ก่ and since then, since I came back, things have not existed for me, and nobody existed, because I did not exist myself. (A Preface to D. H. Lawrence 41) 
At this time, Lawrence was confused and scared. 
The war made his life in ruins. 
After the declaration of war, Lawrence wrote: 'the war is just hell for me. 
I don't see why I should be so disturbed- but I am. I can't get away from it for a minute, live in a sort of coma, like one of those nightmares when you can't move.
The war finished me; it was the spear through the side of all sorrows and hopes.
Not only did it dash all hopes of returning to Italy, but also of living happily with Frieda, or of having his novel published. 
The war damaged his very belief in his country and his age. 
During this, he might seem farsighted: how could one believe in a civilization responsible for such wickedness and carnage as the war would generate?
It took him years to understand quite what had happened to him in 1914. 
But he was one of the first to grasp what an extraordinary moment it was. 
