CHAPTER EIGHT Tents and Temples
Kathryn's penchant for stirring up controversy followed her to Pittsburgh. 
By the early spring of 1951, her meetings in the Carnegie Hall were being picketed by angry pastors and a few church leaders who claimed she was "stealing sheep" from the local churches.
She countered that she was not stealing sheep, just feeding a flock of starving lambs.
That made the ministers even more determined to deal with their "competition." 
They complained to the mayor's office that since Kathryn had held meetings in the cityowned auditorium every night for more than six months, she had actually turned their tax-supported property into a church. 
But Pittsburgh's mayor, David Lawrence (who was later elected governor of the state), turned out to be one of Kathryn's staunchest friends and supporters. 
A Roman Catholic, he issued instructions that Kathryn was to stay in Carnegie Auditorium as long as she wanted. 
She remained for twenty years. But in the meantime, the controversy grew more intense.
Redbook magazine assigned Pittsburgh reporter Emily Gardner Neal (who later helped write I Believe in Miracles for Miss Kuhlman) to look into the situation. 
The resulting story set Kathryn on the road to national prominence. 
In an unprecedented editor's foreword to their seven-page story, Redbook said:
The amazing story of Kathryn Kuhlman was one which Redbook editors approached with misgivings. 
No amount of doubt regarding "faith healing" of any sort, however, could obscure the fact that startling things were happening at Miss Kuhlman's evangelistic services in Pittsburgh. 
For four months, writers and researchers investigated the healings and cures. If Redbook' s investigators erred, it was on the side of skepticism. 
But as they questioned and studied, the edirors' original incredulity gave way to a conviction that the facts demanded publication...
Physicians' statements, of course, have been difficult to obtain; although a doctor may not personally object to describing a patient's progress under such circumstances, he usually refuses out of deference to the medical profession's wariness of faith healing...
This magazine has in its custody the following confidential documents: twenty testimonials from persons claiming to have been healed; four statements from clergymen supporting Miss Kuhlman's ministry: two letters from public officials; four workmen's compensation reports; two statements from men in fields allied to medical work and six medical and X-ray reports...
C. M. Clark, Pittsburgh hearing-aid expert, stated in a letter: "We actually saw God's miracle healing" of a deaf-mute who repeated words "using lip forms, throat tones and nasal sounds which she had never experienced."
This magazine therefore invites readers' attention to this report, the integrity of which has been checked in every possible way, confident that persons who have faith, or the hope of it, will find here a message of deep inner significance.
Despite Redbook' s claim that they could prove many of those who attended the miracle services were healed, Kathryn's critics grew even more vocal. For the first time in her career, she was being attacked theologically rather than personally. 
It was an entirely new war.
The most vicious attack came in the summer of 1952. 
At the invitation of Rex and Maude Aimee Humbard, a traveling evangelistic family from Arkansas, Kathryn went to Akron, Ohio, for a series of meetings in the huge tent erected by the Humbard family on Triplett Boulevard next to the Akron airport. 
The Humbards were well-known in Ohio, although their ministry had been a traveling one. 
With Rex and his wife were Dad and Mother Humbard, who had been preaching for more than forty years, and Rex's brother, Clement. 
Kathryn, of course, was already famous throughout the area due to her extensive radio broadcasts and the large services she had been holding on a regular basis at Stambaugh Auditorium in nearby Youngstown.
What Kathryn didn't know was she had invaded the lair of the most noted fundamentalist preacher in the North-Dallas Billington, of the million-dollar Akron Baptist Temple. 
Billington had been ordained a Southern Baptist minister at a small church in Murray, Kentucky, in 1924. 
Shortly after, the fiery preacher, in collusion with several other Baptist ministers-including John R. Rice and J. Frank Norris of the First Baptist Church of Ft. Worth, Texas-began a devastating attack on the Southern Baptist Convention, saying it had turned liberal. 
As the attack grew more vicious, some of the pastors withdrew from the SBC and formed a loose league of independent Baptist churches whose primary purpose seemed to consist of attacking liberals, Catholics, faith healers, and women preachers. 
In fact, one of the most popular books making the rounds was written by John R. Rice and entitled, Bobbed Hair, Bossy Wives and Women Preachers. 
Billington, a former factory worker who could never be accused of running from a fight, was granted a church theological degree-Doctor of Bibliology-from the First Baptist Church of Ft. Worth, Texas. He moved to Akron in 1925 to establish the Akron Baptist Temple. 
During his twenty-seven years, he had built a dynasty over which he ruled as absolute monarch in the thriving rubber city. 
The arrival of the huge Humbard family tent, which had a seating capacity of more than 15,000, and "that woman faith healer" Kathryn Kuhlman at the same time, was tantamount to waving a red flag in front of an angry bull. 
Kathryn was in for the fight of her life, only this time she was not throwing against a bush leaguer like M.J. Maloney, but the king of swat, Dallas Billington.
Billington lost no time in getting out of the dugout. He had every intention of belting her out of the park. 
Hopefully he'd be able to hit a grand slam and get rid of the Humbards as well. 
Like Casey, he eventually struck out, but not until he hit a lot of screaming foul balls, which had everyone in Akron ducking.
On Sunday, August 10, 1952, Kathryn made her first pitch, preaching to more than 15,000 people, who jammed the huge tent. 
Many of the people arrived as early as five o'clock that morning in order to get seats for the nine o'clock service, which lasted until after noon.
On August 15, Billington struck back. 
In a news release which was plastered on the front page of the Akron Beacon Journal, the bombastic preacher offered $5,000 to anyone- man or woman-who could prove he or she could heal a person through prayer.
"I make my offer to emphasize my belief that there is no greater racket in America-whether it be horse jockeying, dog races, or the numbers racket-than the so-called divine healers of our day. 
I have a mute class in my congregation. If Kathryn Kuhlman will come out to the temple on Sunday and open their ears and loose their tongues so they can talk, I'll let her hold one service in my temple each month for twelve months free of charge."
Billington, who publicly accused Kathryn of having received her training from the writings of Aimee Semple McPherson, stated, "Nowhere was the power of divine healing ever given to be administered by any woman. 
Women have their rightful places, but when you put one in the pulpit, it is unscriptural."
Billington was following the straight fundamentalist line, a line he himself had helped make popular as one of the most powerful and successful preachers of his generation. 
There was never any indication that he was attacking Kathryn personally, although before the night was over he did go to his pulpit and "expose" her as a divorcee. 
However, he felt he had a divine right to blow the trumpet and warn the sheep that there was a wolf prowling the outskirts of town.
Kathryn, remembering her victories in Franklin, flushed with the success of her ministry in Pittsburgh and Youngstown, and encouraged by the thousands of people who rose to her support, wound up and fired her fast ball right down the middle.
"I have been in this vicinity seven years, and I feel that my life and ministry speak for themselves," she told the newspaper. "I have never at any time or place made a statement that I have ever healed anyone. It is the power of God. 
Go right ahead and publish anything Dr. Billington says. 
He's going to split his church wide open."
The response was instantaneous. 
The newspaper's circulation department reported that the demand for extra papers was second only to the annual requests which poured in from all over the country at Soap Box Derby time-an annual event for which Akron is famous. 
Letters by the thousands poured into the newspaper office as well as into Kathryn's offices in the Carlton House in Pittsburgh.
Rex Humbard, who never expected this kind of battle from one he called a "brother in the Lord," was aghast over what was happening. 
He called Kathryn, releasing her from her obligation to preach the following Sunday, if she wished.
"No one likes this airing our dirty linen in public less than I," she said. "Let's hold our ground. 
I'll be there Sunday morning with bells on." 
Not only was Kathryn there, but more than 20,000 others showed up also. 
Billington had, unwittingly, given Kathryn and the Humbards more publicity than they had money to purchase.
Back in Pittsburgh, Kathryn was lining up her defense. 
Maggie Hartner, who was now working full-time, was being helped out by two sisters, Maryon Marsh and Ruth Fisher. 
Like many others, Ruth and Maryon had been marginal Christians when they attended their first miracle service in 1950. However, after Ruth was healed of a severe spine condition which had kept her in and out of hospitals for half her life, the two of them got serious-with God and with the Kuhlman ministry. 
Ruth began helping Maggie minister among the people during the miracle services, and Maryon went to work in the office as a typist. (Ruth later joined her as a staff member.)
Besides the Sunday services in Akron, Kathryn was holding intermittent miracle services in New Castle, Youngstown, and Butler, as well as a regular Tuesday night Bible study in Pittsburgh and her big miracle service at Carnegie Hall on Friday. 
Ruth and Maryon were both musical and sensed a need for a choir during the services. They organized a group of single women in Ruth's basement and sang at a few of the services. 
Seeing the need for a choir, Kathryn then made contact with Dr. Arthur Metcalfe, the distinguished director of the Mendelssohn Choir in Pittsburgh. She persuaded him to come with her as her choir director. It was one of the best moves she ever made. 
Dr. Metcalfe, dedicated more than twenty-three years to the ministry before he succumbed to a heart attack exactly a year-to the day-before Kathryn died.
Another member of her "Pittsburgh team" was her accountant, Walter Adamack. 
Already nearing retirement age, Adamack was, in many ways, like Kathryn's papa. He distrusted preachers and religious institutions. When he heard of Billington's attack against Kathryn, he knew he had lined up on the right side. 
He was a fighter and thought nothing of using colorful language when someone attacked those to whom he was loyal. He represented much of what Billington opposed. 
Kathryn liked him, however. She liked him because he was outspoken, and a little bit arrogant. 
He became the watchdog over her finances. Later, he helped her with the formation of her foundation and several side corporations. 
He was one of Kathryn's most trusted friends and advisors-and an invaluable aide when she waded into her fight with Billington.
Thus fortified by a good staff and thousands of friends, who were writing letters and making telephone calls, Kathryn girded herself for the next inning of the battle between the tent and the temple.
Returning to Akron for the Sunday service, she brought with her a number of people, all of whom had volunteered to testify of physical healings. 
