Late Bloomers
Ben Fountain was an associate in the real-estate practice at the Dallas offices of Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, just a few years out of law school, when he decided he wanted to write fiction. 
The only thing Fountain had ever published was a law-review article. 
His literary training consisted of a handful of creative-writing classes in college. 
He had tried to write when he came home at night from work, but usually he was too tired to do much. 
He decided to quit his job.
"I was tremendously apprehensive,¡± Fountain recalls. ¡°I felt like I¡¯d stepped off a cliff and I didn¡¯t know if the parachute was going to open. 
Nobody wants to waste their life, and I was doing well at the practice of law. I could have had a good career. 
And my parents were very proud of me¡ªmy dad was so proud of me. . . . 
It was crazy."
He began his new life on a February morning¡ªa Monday. 
He sat down at his kitchen table at 7:30 A.M. He made a plan. 
Every day, he would write until lunchtime. 
Then he would lie down on the floor for twenty minutes to rest his mind. 
Then he would return to work for a few more hours. 
He was a lawyer. He had discipline. 
¡°I figured out very early on that if I didn¡¯t get my writing done I felt terrible. 
So I always got my writing done. 
I treated it like a job. I did not procrastinate.¡± 
His first story was about a stockbroker who uses inside information and crosses a moral line. 
It was sixty pages long and took him three months to write. 
When he finished that story, he went back to work and wrote another¡ªand then another.
In his first year, Fountain sold two stories. 
He gained confidence. He wrote a novel. 
He decided it wasn¡¯t very good, and he ended up putting it in a drawer. 
Then came what he describes as his dark period, when he adjusted his expectations and started again. 
He got a short story published in Harper¡¯s. 
A New York literary agent saw it and signed him up. 
He put together a collection of short stories titled ¡°Brief Encounters with Che Guevara,¡± and Ecco, a HarperCollins imprint, published it. 
The reviews were sensational. 
The Times Book Review called it ¡°heartbreaking.¡± 
It won the Hemingway Foundation/PEN award. It was named a No. 1 Book Sense Pick. 
It made major regional best-seller lists, was named one of the best books of the year by the San Francisco Chronicle, the Chicago Tribune, and Kirkus Reviews, and drew comparisons to Graham Greene, Evelyn Waugh, Robert Stone, and John le Carr¨¦.
Ben Fountain¡¯s rise sounds like a familiar story: the young man from the provinces suddenly takes the literary world by storm. 
But Ben Fountain¡¯s success was far from sudden. 
He quit his job at Akin, Gump in 1988. 
For every story he published in those early years, he had at least thirty rejections. 
The novel that he put away in a drawer took him four years. 
The dark period lasted for the entire second half of the nineteen-nineties. 
His breakthrough with ¡°Brief Encounters¡± came in 2006, eighteen years after he first sat down to write at his kitchen table. 
The ¡°young¡± writer from the provinces took the literary world by storm at the age of forty-eight.
Genius, in the popular conception, is inextricably tied up with precocity¡ªdoing something truly creative, we¡¯re inclined to think, requires the freshness and exuberance and energy of youth. 
Orson Welles made his masterpiece, ¡°Citizen Kane,¡± at twenty-five. 
Herman Melville wrote a book a year through his late twenties, culminating, at age thirty-two, with ¡°Moby-Dick.¡± 
Mozart wrote his breakthrough Piano Concerto No. 9 in E-Flat-Major at the age of twenty-one. 
In some creative forms, like lyric poetry, the importance of precocity has hardened into an iron law. 
How old was T. S. Eliot when he wrote ¡°The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock¡± (¡°I grow old . . . I grow old¡±)? 
Twenty-three. 
¡°Poets peak young,¡± the creativity researcher James Kaufman maintains. 
Mih¨¢ly Cs¨ªkszentmih¨¢lyi, the author of ¡°Flow,¡± agrees: ¡°The most creative lyric verse is believed to be that written by the young.¡± 
According to the Harvard psychologist Howard Gardner, a leading authority on creativity, ¡°Lyric poetry is a domain where talent is discovered early, burns brightly, and then peters out at an early age.¡±
A few years ago, an economist at the University of Chicago named David Galenson decided to find out whether this assumption about creativity was true. 
He looked through forty-seven major poetry anthologies published since 1980 and counted the poems that appear most frequently. 
Some people, of course, would quarrel with the notion that literary merit can be quantified. But Galenson simply wanted to poll a broad cross-section of literary scholars about which poems they felt were the most important in the American canon. 
The top eleven are, in order, T. S. Eliot¡¯s ¡°Prufrock,¡± Robert Lowell¡¯s ¡°Skunk Hour,¡± Robert Frost¡¯s ¡°Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening,¡± William Carlos Williams¡¯s ¡°Red Wheelbarrow,¡± Elizabeth Bishop¡¯s ¡°The Fish,¡± Ezra Pound¡¯s ¡°The River Merchant¡¯s Wife,¡± Sylvia Plath¡¯s ¡°Daddy,¡± Pound¡¯s ¡°In a Station of the Metro,¡± Frost¡¯s ¡°Mending Wall,¡± Wallace Stevens¡¯s ¡°The Snow Man,¡± and Williams¡¯s ¡°The Dance.¡± 
Those eleven were composed at the ages of twenty-three, forty-one, forty-eight, forty, twenty-nine, thirty, thirty, twenty-eight, thirty-eight, forty-two, and fifty-nine, respectively. 
There is no evidence, Galenson concluded, for the notion that lyric poetry is a young person¡¯s game. 
Some poets do their best work at the beginning of their careers. Others do their best work decades later. 
Forty-two per cent of Frost¡¯s anthologized poems were written after the age of fifty. 
For Williams, it¡¯s forty-four per cent. For Stevens, it¡¯s forty-nine per cent.
The same was true of film, Galenson points out in his study ¡°Old Masters and Young Geniuses: The Two Life Cycles of Artistic Creativity.¡± 
Yes, there was Orson Welles, peaking as a director at twenty-five. 
But then there was Alfred Hitchcock, who made ¡°Dial M for Murder,¡± ¡°Rear Window,¡± ¡°To Catch a Thief,¡± ¡°The Trouble with Harry,¡± ¡°Vertigo,¡± ¡°North by Northwest,¡± and ¡°Psycho¡±¡ªone of the greatest runs by a director in history¡ªbetween his fifty-fourth and sixty-first birthdays. 
Mark Twain published ¡°Adventures of Huckleberry Finn¡± at forty-nine. 
Daniel Defoe wrote ¡°Robinson Crusoe¡± at fifty-eight.
The examples that Galenson could not get out of his head, however, were Picasso and C¨¦zanne. 
He was an art lover, and he knew their stories well. 
Picasso was the incandescent prodigy. 
His career as a serious artist began with a masterpiece, ¡°Evocation: The Burial of Casagemas,¡± produced at age twenty. 
In short order, he painted many of the greatest works of his career¡ªincluding ¡°Les Demoiselles d¡¯Avignon,¡± at the age of twenty-six. 
Picasso fit our usual ideas about genius perfectly
C¨¦zanne didn¡¯t. 
If you go to the C¨¦zanne room at the Mus¨¦e d¡¯Orsay, in Paris¡ªthe finest collection of C¨¦zannes in the world¡ªthe array of masterpieces you¡¯ll find along the back wall were all painted at the end of his career. 
Galenson did a simple economic analysis, tabulating the prices paid at auction for paintings by Picasso and C¨¦zanne with the ages at which they created those works. 
A painting done by Picasso in his mid-twenties was worth, he found, an average of four times as much as a painting done in his sixties. 
For C¨¦zanne, the opposite was true. The paintings he created in his mid-sixties were valued fifteen times as highly as the paintings he created as a young man. 
The freshness, exuberance, and energy of youth did little for C¨¦zanne. 
He was a late bloomer¡ªand for some reason in our accounting of genius and creativity we have forgotten to make sense of the C¨¦zannes of the world.
The first day that Ben Fountain sat down to write at his kitchen table went well. 
He knew how the story about the stockbroker was supposed to start. 
But the second day, he says, he ¡°completely freaked out.¡± 
He didn¡¯t know how to describe things. He felt as if he were back in first grade. 
He didn¡¯t have a fully formed vision, waiting to be emptied onto the page. 
¡°I had to create a mental image of a building, a room, a fa?ade, haircut, clothes¡ªjust really basic things,¡± he says. 
¡°I realized I didn¡¯t have the facility to put those into words. 
I started going out and buying visual dictionaries, architectural dictionaries, and going to school on those.¡±
He began to collect articles about things he was interested in, and before long he realized that he had developed a fascination with Haiti. 
¡°The Haiti file just kept getting bigger and bigger,¡± Fountain says. 
¡°And I thought, O.K., here¡¯s my novel. 
For a month or two I said I really don¡¯t need to go there, I can imagine everything. 
But after a couple of months I thought, Yeah, you¡¯ve got to go there, and so I went, in April or May of ¡¯91.¡±
He spoke little French, let alone Haitian Creole. 
He had never been abroad. Nor did he know anyone in Haiti. 
¡°I got to the hotel, walked up the stairs, and there was this guy standing at the top of the stairs,¡± Fountain recalls. 
¡°He said, ¡®My name is Pierre. 
You need a guide.¡¯ I said, ¡®You¡¯re sure as hell right, I do.¡¯ 
He was a very genuine person, and he realized pretty quickly I didn¡¯t want to go see the girls, I didn¡¯t want drugs, I didn¡¯t want any of that other stuff,¡± Fountain went on. 
¡°And then it was, boom, ¡®I can take you there. 
I can take you to this person.¡¯ ¡±
Fountain was riveted by Haiti. 
¡°It¡¯s like a laboratory, almost,¡± he says. 
¡°Everything that¡¯s gone on in the last five hundred years¡ªcolonialism, race, power, politics, ecological disasters¡ªit¡¯s all there in very concentrated form. 
And also I just felt, viscerally, pretty comfortable there.¡± He made more trips to Haiti, sometimes for a week, sometimes for two weeks. 
He made friends. 
He invited them to visit him in Dallas. (¡°You haven¡¯t lived until you¡¯ve had Haitians stay in your house,¡± Fountain says.) 
¡°I mean, I was involved. I couldn¡¯t just walk away. 
There¡¯s this very nonrational, nonlinear part of the whole process. 
I had a pretty specific time era that I was writing about, and certain things that I needed to know. But there were other things I didn¡¯t really need to know. 
I met a fellow who was with Save the Children, and he was on the Central Plateau, which takes about twelve hours to get to on a bus, and I had no reason to go there. But I went up there. 
Suffered on that bus, and ate dust. 
It was a hard trip, but it was a glorious trip. 
It had nothing to do with the book, but it wasn¡¯t wasted knowledge.¡±
In ¡°Brief Encounters with Che Guevara,¡± four of the stories are about Haiti, and they are the strongest in the collection. 
They feel like Haiti; they feel as if they¡¯ve been written from the inside looking out, not the outside looking in. 
¡°After the novel was done, I don¡¯t know, I just felt like there was more for me, and I could keep going, keep going deeper there,¡± Fountain recalls. 
¡°Always there¡¯s something¡ªalways something¡ªhere for me. 
How many times have I been? At least thirty times.¡±
Prodigies like Picasso, Galenson argues, rarely engage in that kind of open-ended exploration. 
They tend to be ¡°conceptual,¡± Galenson says, in the sense that they start with a clear idea of where they want to go, and then they execute it. 
