Dorothy Parker Biography
Dorothy Parker Rothschild represented one of the most accomplished feminist and successful literary writers in women's history. 
Existing from 1893-1967, she became known as one of the most brilliant writers from the early 1900s. 
Born in West End, New Jersey, and attaining her success from New York, she became one of the most brilliant writers that revolutionized American thinking then and after. 
Dorothy Parker lived a full and prosperous life, even though she did not have a happy childhood. 
Growing up, having bad relationships with her father and stepmother, she never had the privilege of growing up with a mother. 
Her mother died on July 20, 1897, when Dorothy was only four years of age, and her father died shortly after on December 28, 1913. 
Right before the death of her father was the passing away of her "brother Henry, who died on the passage home from a vacation with his wife Lissie aboard a first class steamship the Titanic, which sank in 1912." (Click here to see the source for this quote.) 
As a sad woman, stung with depression and alcoholism her entire adult life, she had a successful and productive life. 
In 1916, at the age of 23, she joined the editorial staff of Vogue. 
Then in 1917 she started working for as a theater critic for Vanity Fair, who had published her first poem entitled "Any Porch," (1914), in which she received $12.
Vanity Fair became a significant variable in her life in that she met her associates whom she would form the Algonquin Round Table/Vicious Circle, an intellectual and renowned literary circle. 
Because of unfair reasons, Dorothy was let go in her position at Vanity Fair in which case her colleague and later her closest confidant, Robert Benchley, also resigned; Parker and Benchley then became partners in a writing firm called "Park-Bench." 
At a luncheon in the Algonquin Hotel they met an elite group of intellectuals who became part of their literary circle. 
Similar to the "Radical Women of Greenwich Village," she portrayed the liberated feminist of the 1900s. 
But unlike those women, Parker's roots were not from a wealthy family, who were attempting to escape their repressing elite high class society in which they may have grown up or their possessive families and/or husbands. 
The Algonquin Round Table exemplified one of her most brilliant and accomplished achievements, for this brought together the most brilliant literary writers of that time, including Robert Benchley, Robert E. Sherwood, James Thurber, George S. Kaufman, Edna Ferber, Franklin P. Adams, and many others.
In 1917, she also met her husband, Edwin Pond Parker, a young stockbroker, who she divorced in the same year. 
She married again in 1934 to Allan Campbell, with whom she formed a screen writing team at Paramount Pictures. 
Divorced after 16 years of marriage, Parker remarried Campbell again in 1950 and stayed with him until his death from a heart attack in 1967. 
Susan Shapiro argues that she may have written her own eulogy, which may have included quotes from her poem "The Braggart," stating, "You will be frail and musty/with peering, furtive head/, While I am Young and Lusty/ Among the roaring dead." 
A witty and brilliant conversationalist, Dorothy Parker contributed to many works of literature including newspaper columns, reviews, screenplays, satirical verses, and books; she is especially known for short stories, poems, and powerful quotes. 
Her tone is ironical, poignant, and often cuttingly witty and cynical. 
Many of her works were written from a practical point of view, and her pessimistic writings still carried the weight of powerful prose. 
Regina Barreca wrote, in the introduction to Parker's Collected Stories, that "Parker's wit caricatures the self-deluded, the powerful, the autocratic, the vain, the sill, and the self important; it does not rely on men and small formulas, and it never ridicules the marginalized, the sideline or the outcast. 
When Parker goes for the jugular, its usually a vein with blueblood in it."
According to Barreca, many of the critics of her time painted her as having "sold out" and "wasted herself by writing about narrow topics." 
Nevertheless, her works paved the way for other realist writings by intellectuals, and other writers, which transformed American thought. 
