Flannery O'Connor
When Flannery O'Connor was 5 years old, she purportedly taught her pet bantam chicken to walk backward. 
The stunt attracted the attention of the Pathe newsreel company, and a Yankee cameraman was dispatched to her family's backyard in Savannah, Ga., to document the trick. 
O'Connor never saw the humorous short, though it was screened in many movie theaters across America in 1932. 
Yet years later in an essay in Holiday magazine, she claimed the unlikely event "marked me for life."
By the time she was wrote that 1961 essay, "The King of the Birds," O'Connor was a cult literary celebrity. 
She had published two novels - "Wise Blood" (1952) and "The Violent Bear It Away" (1960)--as well as the collection of stories -"A Good Man Is Hard to Find" (1955) -- that truly put her on the map. 
The O'Connor family's antebellum home in Milledgeville, Ga., was featured in Newsweek; a quasi- glamorous portrait appeared in Harper's Bazaar; her work was excerpted in Vogue. 
She used her freakish chicken as a pretext to meditate on her uneasy relation to fame and popular culture, claiming that all the attention made her feel like a cross between "Roy Rogers's horse and Miss Watermelon of 1955."
Dying in 1964 of lupus at age 39, unmarried, having lived mostly on a dairy farm with her mother, O'Connor's life and work might then have been expected to fade from memory. 
She swore there would be no biographies as "lives spent between the house and the chicken yard do not make exciting copy." 
Yet The New York Times deemed a story in her collection, "Everything That Rises Must Converge,'' published eight months after her death, among "the few masterpieces of the form in English;" her "Complete Stories'' won a posthumous 1972 National Book Award; she was the first postwar American woman author in the canonic Library of America; the phrase "like something out of Flannery O'Connor" entered our language as shorthand for nailing many a funny, dark, askew moment. 
Like her backward chicken, O'Connor's fiction continues to fascinate by running counter to much trendy literary culture.
Savannah
Born in Savannah on March 25, 1925, Mary Flannery O'Connor was the only child of Edward, a real estate agent, and Regina. 
Living on Lafayette Square, in the shadow of St. John the Baptist Cathedral, she was raised in a minority Irish-Catholic community within the larger Protestant South, and was taught by the strict Sisters of Mercy at St. Vincent's Grammar School. 
Writing and drawing ambidextrously from an early age, her first "book," lovingly bound by her father, was "My Relitives," a series of scathing satiric drawings and captions. 
Her highly protected girlhood was shattered when her father developed lupus and died in early 1941, after briefly moving his family to Atlanta for a Depression-era FHA job.
Milledgeville
O'Connor's mother then took her to live with relatives in the Cline family home, an 1838 columned Federal clapboard house, briefly used as the governor's mansion when Milledgeville served as the antebellum capital of Georgia. 
She passed her teen years in a strongly matriarchal world with Regina as well as her three aunts -- Mary, Katie, and Gertie. 
O'Connor developed a high profile as class cartoonist at both PeabodyHigh School and the local Georgia State College for Women, as she produced painstaking linoleum-cut cartoons that were "single-frame satires" on campus life. 
Admiring James Thurber, she submitted cartoons to The New Yorker magazine, receiving back "a lot of encouragin' rejection slips."
Up North
At first planning on a career as a political cartoonist, in the fall of 1945 O'Connor enrolled in the journalism graduate school at the State University of Iowa. 
Within her first few weeks in Iowa City, she found her way to Paul Engle's Writers' Workshop, the first MFA program in the country, and switched her major. 
Discovering her vocation as a writer, she dropped "Mary" from her name; had her first story, "The Geranium," published in Accent magazine; received a Rinehart fellowship to work on a novel. 
In 1948, she moved on to spend nine months at the artists' colony Yaddo, where she met the poet Robert Lowell; lived for six months, in 1949, in Manhattan, meeting her publisher Robert Giroux; boarded in Redding, Conn., with poet-translator Robert Fitzgerald, his wife Sally and their children, writing "Wise Blood.''
Andalusia
O'Connor developed a high fever on a train ride home to Georgia at Christmastime 1950. 
She was diagnosed, like her father, with lupus erythematosus, and over the next year was in and out of hospitals in Milledgeville and at Emory University in Atlanta. 
