Paul Newman
Paul Newman, actor and philanthropist, died on September 27th, aged 83
THE eyes were blue. Cornflower blue, steel blue, ice blue. 
They smouldered through the soft-focus foliage in "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" as he swayed on a bicycle with Katharine Ross on the handlebars. 
They stared beautifully in his middle-aged lawyer's face as, in "The Verdict", he was handed an enormous cheque which he refused to take. 
They were so blue that they registered even in black and white. 
As he stepped out of the ranch door in "Hud", casually buttoning his shirt, or as he woke himself up in "The Hustler" for another frame with Minnesota Fats after 25 hours at the pool table, you could have sworn they glowed with the colour of some deep, distant sky.
Paul Newman himself thought little of them. 
He hid them behind sunglasses, and sometimes asked his fans whether this was all they valued him for. 
His epitaph, he once said, should be "Here lies Paul Newman, who died a failure because his eyes turned brown."
He also thought little of those screen performances. 
Until the 1990s he could not bear to watch himself. 
He so hated his first appearance, swaddled in a toga in "The Silver Chalice" in 1954, that he took out an advertisement in Variety begging people not to see it. 
He despaired later that people seemed to like him as "the cocky hero and the smart-ass and the rake". 
In the end, the only self-reinvention that completely pleased him was the grinning man on the label of "Newman's Own" balsamic dressing. 
His sauces and snacks, sold for charity from 1982 onwards ("shameless exploitation in pursuit of the common good"), turned him into the most generous individual, relative to his income, in the 20th-century history of the United States.
With looks like his, by turns as sultry as Marlon Brando's or as wistful as James Dean's, he could have been any number of romantic leads. 
Instead he played con men ("The Sting"), petty criminals ("Cool Hand Luke"), abusive husbands ("Cat on a Hot Tin Roof") and a string of tough but vulnerable outsiders. 
Even these had moments of electric sexiness: Fast Eddie in "The Hustler" stroking a baize table, Hud nibbling on a flower. 
But they also gulped the bourbon down. 
The typical landscape of a Newman film was the raw sidestreets of a city or the empty plains, in which a man would try to get a grip on an aimless, violent life. 
He chose such parts, not always for the best, because the role of anti-hero was a challenge and an act of defiance.
Celebrity bugged him in every aspect: the studio contract system, from which he rapidly escaped, the Hollywood gossip mill, from which he fled into long-term marriage, motor-racing and Connecticut, the loveless pressure for Oscars and nominations. 
All this was "rubbish". 
He did not care whether his name was on the right or left of the poster, and bigger or smaller than Steve McQueen's. He was unbothered when age began to furrow the brow and fill out the jowls. 
Unlike Robert Redford, his partner for both "Butch Cassidy" and "The Sting", he made no attempt to preserve his prettiness. 
Hollywood could deal with him as he was.
A bolt of lightning
Indifferent to stardom, he was modest too about how he had earned it. 
He picked up method acting at the Actors Studio in New York, but never felt it particularly worked for him. 
Acting was "fiction" to which his own experience-though he too fought with drink, broke up a marriage and had to face the death of a child??was "irrelevant". 
His craft had grown on him at Kenyon College in the late 1940s, between football and beer-bouts that sometimes landed him in jail. 
He supposed he mostly wanted to escape a career in his father's sporting-goods store in Cleveland.
Luck had made the difference to him. 
Luck to be spotted by talent scouts at Yale, and taken in 1952 to New York; luck to get into a hit show on Broadway; luck to be snapped up by Warner Brothers the next year; luck to be picked for his breakthrough film in 1956, about the boxer Rocky Graziano, because Dean, the first choice, had been killed in a car crash. 
The film was called "Somebody Up There Likes Me". Mr Newman agreed; all his life, somebody did, from the blue eyes onwards.
His urge to give something back grew out of that. 
It began as a joke, putting home-made salad dressing in an old wine bottle, tying it with a ribbon and giving it to friends. 
He made more and more, went into partnership, pressed cases on the local grocer, and in two years had a multi-million-dollar business. 
All profits after tax, more than $250m so far, went to charitable causes round the world, of which his favourite were his 11 Hole in the Wall Camps for children with life-threatening illnesses. 
There, freed from hospitals, they could "raise a little hell" for a while.
He liked to do the same. Mr Newman was not a man for plans; he preferred creative chaos. 
He saw himself first as an inventor, whether of sauces or parts. 
His favourite directors were those, like Sidney Lumet on "The Verdict", who were open and responsive to his own fizzing ideas. 
Mr Redford, with whom he memorably jumped off a cliff and raced out of a mission into hundreds of Bolivian rifles, said he had "the attention span of a bolt of lightning". 
That sense of a lightning-strike returned whenever the camera fixed on him, its blue-eyed boy.
