Remembering Ravi Shankar the godfather of world music
AT A music festival in California in June 1967, a middle-aged sitar player watched Jimi Hendrix set his guitar on fire. 
The crowd cheered. Ravi Shankar was horrified.
Mr Shankar, who died in San Diego on December 11, aged 92, was an Indian classical musician who brought the sounds of the sitar and the raga into Western pop music. 
From the 1960s onwards, by collaborating with and influencing musicians such as John Coltrane and George Harrison (pictured with Mr Shankar above), he engendered the kinds of fusions that have since become more common. 
Harrison once called him "the godfather of world music".
Born in 1920 in Benares, a holy Indian city now called Varanasi, Mr Shankar came from an affluent and artistic family. 
The Shankars were Brahmins, members of India's highest caste, and Bengalis, who hail from an area of eastern India that is rich with poets, philosophers and film-makers. 
Their eldest son was a dancer who worked with Anna Pavlova, the world's top ballerina in the early-20th century. 
Mr Shankar joined his brother's touring dance troupe at the age of ten, but by his late teens he had set his heart on the sitar, a guitar-like instrument with a gourd-shaped body and both melodic and "sympathetic" strings (the latter resonate when the former are plucked).
Mr Shankar gained acclaim in India as both a performer and a composer--he wrote scores for Satyajit Ray, a fellow Bengali who is still regarded as one of the country's best film-makers. 
He started teaching American jazz musicians such as John Coltrane and Don Ellis, and also recorded albums with Yehudi Menuhin, an American violinist, and Philip Glass, one of the 20th century's most influential composers. 
But he is perhaps best known for his influence on the Beatles--Harrison, the band's lead guitarist, was so taken with Mr Shankar that he went to India to have sitar lessons with him.
Music was also the spine of his personal life. 
His first wife was Annapurna Devi, his guru's daughter and a gifted sitarist. A 2005 biography of Ms Devi states that her husband made her vow not to perform in public so that she would not overshadow him. 
In the late 1940s, Mr Shankar began a long relationship with Kamala Shastri, a dancer. 
He then met Sue Jones, a concert producer with whom he had a daughter in 1979, Norah Jones, a singer who has won nine Grammy awards. 
In 1989, he married Sukanya Rajan. 
Their daughter, Anoushka Shankar, is a sitarist who performed regularly with her father over the last decade.
On paper, Mr Shankar was a perfect guru for the long-haired, incense-burning hippy movement. 
But, in later years, he admitted he was not entirely comfortable at the hedonistic California festivals of the 1960s, such as Monterey Festival and Woodstock. 
The drugs, mayhem and short-lived fads for one kind of music or another unsettled him. 
He thought Jimi Hendrix's flaming guitar was the "greatest sacrilege possible". 
However, he continued his pop music collaborations, even though some musicians in India, perhaps envious, criticised him for working with Western popstars. 
A week before his death, he was told that he would receive a lifetime achievement award at next year's Grammy ceremony in February.
