Georgia O'Keeffe, Biography, Quotations & Art
Georgia O'Keeffe gained worldwide fame for her austere minimalist paintings of the US Southwest. 
Born in Sun Prairie, Wisconsin, on 15 November 1887, O'Keefe grew up in Virginia and first studied painting at the Art Institute of Chicago. 
Initially, she embraced a highly abstracted, urban style of art. She later moved to New York where she thrived within the growing community of abstract expressionists. 
Beginning in 1912, though, she began spending time in Texas and she became the head of the art department at the West Texas State Normal College in 1916. 
O'Keeffe's time in Texas sparked her enduring fascination with the stark and powerful western landscape. 
She began to paint more representational images that drew on the natural forms of the canyons and plains that surrounded her. 
O'Keeffe's paintings of cow skulls and calla lilies gained particular attention and won her an enthusiastic audience.
Her marriage to the New York art dealer and photographer Alfred Stieglitz brought O'Keeffe back to the northeast. 
For a decade, she divided her time between New York City and the couple's home in Lake George, New York. 
In 1919, O'Keeffe made a brief visit to the small New Mexican village of Taos, and she returned for a longer stay in 1929. 
Attracted to the clear desert light and snow-capped mountains, she began returning to New Mexico every summer to paint. 
O'Keeffe found a vibrant and supportive community among the artists that had been flocking to Taos and Santa Fe since the 1890s.
After Stieglitz died in 1949, O'Keeffe permanently relocated to Abiquiu, New Mexico. There she continued to produce her hauntingly simple images of the southwestern land she loved. 
By the time she died in 1986, O'Keeffe was considered one of the preeminent artists of the American West and had inspired legions of imitators.
Georgia O'Keeffe was an abstract painter, famous for the purity and lucidity of her still-life compositions. 
She was born in Sun Prairie, Wisconsin, and studied at the school of the Art Institute of Chicago and at the Art Students League of New York. 
She taught art in Texas from 1913 to 1918. 
In 1916 the US photographer and art gallery director Alfred Stieglitz (whom she married in 1924) became interested in her abstract drawings and exhibited them at ?291,? his gallery in New York City. 
Her work was shown annually in Stieglitz's galleries until his death and was widely exhibited in other important institutions.
O'Keeffe, who moved to New Mexico in 1949, is best known for her large paintings of desert flowers and scenery, in which single blossoms or objects such as a cow's skull are presented in close-up views. 
Although O'Keeffe handles her subject matter representationally, the starkly linear quality, the thin, clear coloring, and the boldly patterned compositions produce abstract designs. 
A number of her works have an abstracted effect, the flower paintings in particular ? such as Black Iris (1926)?in which the details of the flower are so enlarged that they become unfamiliar and surprising. 
In the 1960s, inspired by a series of airplane flights, O'Keeffe introduced motifs of sky and clouds, as seen from the air, into her paintings. 
One of her largest works is the mural Sky above Clouds (1965), which is 7.3 m wide.
