Balthus
A reclusive, mythomanic soi-disant aristocrat, he was best known for his luminous if troubling paintings of adolescent girls. Replete with dreamy introspection and sexual readiness, his figures stare out of windows or stand on step-ladders in trees, gazing into the distance in an atmosphere loaded with erotic tension.
Such work brought him a reputation as an artist with an obsession with young girls. But Balthus made a show of appearing indifferent to this suggestion. 
"The interpretation of my work," he held, "is in most cases complete misinterpretation." 
His supporters claimed that the mood of elegy and hope in his most typical paintings portrayed something more subtle, a loss of innocence. 
Balthus, characteristically, was non-committal. 
"Everybody sees what he wants to see", was all he would say.
His reticence extended to personal publicity of any kind. When pressed by the Tate Gallery in 1968 for biographical information for an exhibition catalogue, he cabled: "No biographical details. Begin: Balthus is a painter of whom nothing is known. 
Now let us look at the pictures. 
Regards, B."
It was an approach reminiscent of that adopted by Greta Garbo, and one that similarly only heightened curiosity about him. 
It did the prices of his paintings no harm either. 
In the last decade they have sold for as much as $6 million, a figure only matched by one other living painter, Lucian Freud.
Throughout his career, Balthus set himself apart from the abstract and conceptualist work synonymous with the development of art in the 20th century. 
He was one of the few artists of his time who sought to represent beauty. 
His drawing is in a class with Courbet, Cezanne, Seurat and Picasso in his periode rose, while his painting comes closest in spirit to that of Piero della Francesca, blending realism with the spiritual.
Painting, he declared, is itself a form of prayer. 
It was one he undertook almost every day, even into his nineties, rarely inviting anyone into the sanctum of his studio, even such close friends as Alberto Giacometti and Henri Cartier-Bresson. Yet the results of his meditation seemed to many closer to blasphemy. 
Indeed, the painting which first brought him to notice, The Guitar Lesson (1934), has a markedly similar composition to the Pieta de Villeneuve-les-Avignons in the Louvre.
In the picture, a teenage girl is shown stretched over the knees of another - her young music teacher - who gazes down at her pupil's naked abdomen while tugging on her hair as if handing out a punishment. 
The child's guitar lies abandoned on the floor. 
The painting was judged too obscene for public display by the director of the Galerie Pierre and was only shown to clients in a private room.
Nonetheless, it caused a sensation, and as late as 1978 it was withdrawn from an exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York because of speculation about its subject matter.
Thereafter Balthus was dogged by a reputation for perversion. 
"Balthus is a giant," wrote one critic, "but to most people he's the fellow who paints little girls showing their panties." 
He was born Balthasar Klossowski in Paris on February 29 1908, the second son of German-born painters. His father, Erich Klossowski, was also an art critic, and was proud of being the only German admitted to the circle of Pierre Bonnard and friends, which included Matisse. 
Balthasar's elder brother, Pierre, went on to become a respected painter and an expert on the Marquis de Sade.
Balthasar was encouraged to paint by Bonnard, but it was the poet Rainer Maria Rilke, who had a long affair with Balthus's mother, who recognised the 12-year-old boy as a prodigy when he saw a series of 40 ink drawings by him. 
In 1921 Rilke had them published as a book entitled Mitsou, to which he provided a preface. 
Rilke also advised him to use his nickname of "Balthus".
Mitsou told the tale of a lost cat, and Balthus liked to compare himself to the animal. 
Certainly there was something feline about his lazy, mischievous, rather manipulative nature. 
His favourite of his own works - and the only one he retained to the end of his life - was a self-portrait from 1935 which depicts an angular young man with a tawny cat. 
He called it A Portrait of HM The King of Cats painted by Himself.
From the outset of his career, he set himself firmly in the tradition of narrative painting. When still a boy he spent three months at the Louvre copying Poussin's Echo and Narcissus. 
At 18, instead of going to art school, he bicycled to Arezzo to copy Piero della Francesca's fresco cycle.
He was thus largely self-taught. 
He always claimed to find painting extremely difficult, and was never satisfied that he had succeeded in committing his vision to canvas.
A 1927 portrait of Balthus by Man Ray captures the painter's indifference to the vagaries of artistic fashion. His aquiline features are accentuated and he looks aristocratic and ascetic, sitting smoking from a cigarette-holder and gazing off camera.
A few years earlier, Balthus had drawn a self-portrait in the antique manner, with his noble-looking profile enclosed by a circle in the manner of a Roman coin. 
In later life, he would style himself "Count", although the legitimacy of his claim to any such title did not bear close examination.
No more plausible was his story that he was related to Byron, a fantasy that revealed the romanticism in his nature. 
In 1933, after spending a year in Morocco on national service, Balthus created a series of prints illustrating Wuthering Heights. Balthus closely identified with Heathcliff, modelling the character's features in the prints on his own.
In the 1930s, Balthus was in the thick of Parisian art life. 
He painted Joan Miro and Andre Derain and designed sets for Artaud's surrealist production of The Cenci. He designed other sets for productions of Shakespeare and for Camus's L'Etat de siege. 
Picasso, in particular, was both an admirer and collector of his work.
In 1934 he held his first one-man show in Paris. 
He was subsequently taken up by Pierre Matisse, the doyen of the New York art world, whose gallery showed his paintings in 1938. 
Balthus quickly became one of the most sought-after artists in America, although he did not go there until he was in his eighties.
Yet from the moment of his first big break in America, when he sold his painting The Street to the collector James Soby, his art excited unease. 
In one part of The Street a man has his hand on a girl's crotch. When Soby hung the painting at home, his young son called friends round to view "the dirty picture". 
It was promptly removed to a vault.
At the outbreak of the Second World War, Balthus was conscripted into the French army, but after a month at the front his health broke down and he was demobilised. 
He spent most of the war painting in Switzerland.
In 1953 he left Paris for a chateau in the village of Chassy in central France. The seven years he spent there were to be his most productive period, resulting in more than 60 paintings, many of them cool, mysteriously still landscapes reminiscent of Seurat.
He was called away from Chassy in 1961 by Andre Malraux, then Charles de Gaulle's Minister of Culture, who made him director of the Academie de France in Rome. This was situated in the Villa Medici, which has connections to many great artists. 
Michelangelo may have had a hand in the villa's design; Velazquez painted in the gardens; Ingres was director for many years. 
Balthus had the house restored to its former splendour and went on collecting trips to the Far East and Afghanistan.
His work in Rome left him little time for painting, but once he had retired to Rossiniere, in Switzerland, where he lived in a large 19th-century chalet, his painting seemed to reach a new standard. The Turkish Room (1963-66) depicts a nude Chinese girl reclining on a sofa in a shuttered and elaborately furnished room. The decorative orientalism of this painting, completed with an almost other-worldly grace, forms a striking contrast to the solid, bourgeois figures of Balthus's early work.
He continued the Far Eastern theme in two later canvasses, Japanese Figure with Black Mirror and Japanese Figure with Black Table (both 1976), each of which used as a model his second wife, Setsuko, a Japanese woman 35 years younger than him.
In recent years he had been much feted by younger celebrities, including the singers David Bowie and Bono. 
He continued to work until his death, and in 2000 showed a painting at the National Gallery in London. 
He had recently begun to make plans for a museum of his art to be housed in an annexe to his chalet.
He married first, in 1932, Antoinette de Watteville; they had two sons. 
He married secondly, in 1967, Setsuko Ideta; they had a daughter, and a son who predeceased him.
