George Ault's World 
The black barn in George Ault's painting January Full Moon is a simple structure, bound by simple lines. 
Yet its angular bones give it a commanding presence. 
The barn stands at attention, its walls planted in moonlit snow and its peak nosing toward a deep blue sky. 
It is bold and brawny, and as Yale University art history professor Alexander Nemerov puts it, a barn with a capital "B," the Barn of all barns.
A little-known American artist, George Ault had the ability in his painting to take specific locations in Woodstock, New York, where he lived from 1937 until his death in 1948, and make them seem universal. 
Nemerov says that places like Rick's Barn, which Ault passed on walks with his wife, Louise, and Russell's Corners, a lonely intersection just outside of town, held some "mystical power" to the artist. 
He fixated on them-painting Russell's Corners five times in the 1940s, in different seasons and times of day-as if they contained some universal truth that would be revealed if he and the viewers of his paintings meditated on them long enough.
After fastidiously studying his scenes, Ault would retreat to a tidy studio to paint. 
As his 1946 self-portrait The Artist at Work shows, he worked with the elbow of his painting arm resting in the cup of his other hand, which balanced on his crossed legs. 
He was methodical and meticulous, often considered part of the post-World War I Precisionism movement. 
With his hand steadied, he could be sure that every plane, clapboard and telephone wire was just so. 
"There's always this sense of shaping, ordering, structuring as if his life depended on it," says Nemerov.
When you take into account Ault's tumultuous life, perhaps it did. 
After attending the University College School , the Slade School of Fine Art and St. John's Wood Art School , all in London , in the early 1900s, the Cleveland native returned to the United States where he suffered a string of personal tragedies. 
In 1915, one of his brothers committed suicide. 
In 1920, his mother died in a mental hospital. 
And in 1929, his father died. 
The stock market crash dealt a hard blow to his family's fortune, and his two other brothers took their lives soon after. 
Grieving his losses, the artist left Manhattan with Louise, whom he married in 1941, for Woodstock , where he lived until December 1948, when he too committed suicide, drowning in a stream near his house. 
As Louise once said, Ault's art was an attempt to make "order out of chaos."
Ault did not get much recognition during his lifetime, in part because of his reclusiveness and hostile attitude toward potential buyers. 
But Louise worked tirelessly to promote her husband's work after his death. 
Of Ault's paintings of Woodstock from the 1940s, she once wrote, "I believed he had gone beyond himself."
