ONE
BECOMING A MAN
IT IS FASCINATING FOR ME TO SIT AND LOOK BACK AT THE road I have traveled to get to where I am now--not only in my career, but in my personal life as well. 
What has at times felt incomprehensible or excessively difficult, today I understand as something that had to happen. 
All my experiences have prepared me for what was--and still is--ahead of me. 
At first it was a difficult concept for me to grasp, but once I was able to internalize it, I got to a point where I could live a more complete and satisfactory life because I am willing to accept that the good, the bad, and the not so great are all part of a whole. 
This feeling has liberated me in so many ways and given me the strength to confront everything that comes my way. 
It is extraordinary to think that without knowing it, from very early on, I was already building my identity, my very own story.
GETTING STARTED
IT ALL BEGAN with a spoon.
Anybody in my family will tell you that music came into my life at a very young age. 
My mother's side of the family has always been musically inclined. 
On Sunday afternoons we would get together at my grandparents' house, and sooner or later someone would pull out a guitar and start singing. 
My grandfather, for example, was a poet, a good one. His rhymed improvisations were romantic and very stylized, in a way I have never heard again. 
My grandfather was a firm man, very conservative, and completely devoted to his family. 
Like most men of his generation he was very macho, but if there is one thing he taught all of us men who carry his name, it is the importance of showing respect to a woman, the beauty of admiring her, caring for her, and protecting her. 
He would always say to us: "A woman must be treated with the subtle delicacy that you would give to a rose petal." 
He was obviously a hopeless romantic, a quality that I have, without a doubt, inherited.
From the time I was six years old, I would grab a wooden kitchen spoon and use it as a microphone to sing. I would spend hours upon hours with the spoon in my hand, interpreting my favorite songs--Menudo songs, or songs from American rock bands, such as REO Speedwagon, Journey, and Led Zeppelin, which is what my older siblings were listening to at the time. 
I remember many times we were all at my grandparents' house, and while everyone was sitting on the balcony getting a breath of fresh air and telling stories, I would put some music on, take hold of my "microphone," and start to sing.
I have no doubt that back then no one ever imagined I'd end up becoming a professional artist (although I did have an uncle who always said, "When you get famous, call me and I'll come carry your luggage." 
To which I would very seriously reply, "Of course!" 
Needless to say, he hasn't come through with his end of the bargain...). 
I'm sure they enjoyed watching me sing and dance around the house, but I know it never occurred to any of us that one day I would be doing just that before hundreds of thousands of people.
As surprising as it may seem, the truth is that ever since I was a young boy, I have always known I was meant to be onstage. 
I can't say it was a conscious decision or that I woke up one day and said, "I want to be an artist." But I can say that I gradually started to realize what I really enjoy doing, and simply tried to do it as often as possible. 
I know it takes some people many years to figure out what they want to do with their lives, to find something that genuinely moves them, and I know it can be a difficult process. 
But I was lucky. For me, it was very instinctive. 
Although at first all I did was grab the spoon and perform for my grandparents and aunts and uncles, I enjoyed it very much. 
In this case, I believe it was more than a passing phase; it was something more powerful, because what started as a game ultimately turned into a passion. 
Slowly, I started to see that capturing other people's attention and having all those eyes on me was a rush. 
I loved feeling that I was entertaining them, that they were listening to me, and when I got big applause, I'd be thrilled to no end. 
To this very day that feeling of being onstage continues to be a source of energy and inspiration for me. 
Every time I find myself in front of an audience, be it twenty people or one hundred thousand, once again I feel the energy that consumed me back at the family gatherings of my youth.
I am not exactly sure where my passion for being onstage comes from, but it somehow feels like I have to be in the spotlight; I want to be seen. . . . 
At some point during my childhood one of my cousins would produce plays--written by her--and it is there where I had my first experiences as an actor. 
Apparently I liked it, because later when I was in school, each time they put on a play I was the first one to sign up. 
I even became an altar boy, because to me, helping the priest was like being onstage, since he was very much "the star" of the show. 
When I was onstage I felt complete and alive, so naturally I wanted to find that sensation at every opportunity.
Every so often I think about what would have happened if I had not chosen this path. 
It's almost inevitable to ask yourself these questions, and it's interesting to think about what would have become of each of our lives if we hadn't turned into the people we are today. 
What would I be had I not become an artist? 
What other profession would I have chosen? 
Psychologist? 
Dentist? 
Lawyer? 
My grandmother had always hoped that I'd be a doctor, but unfortunately I could never fulfill that dream. 
Since the moment I realized what I wanted to do with myself, I've worked tirelessly to make that dream come true. 
But I always ask myself what would have become of me had I listened to my grandmother's advice, or had I taken some other path. 
For example, when I was eighteen, I auditioned for the Tisch School at New York University, one of the most renowned drama schools in the country. 
But just a few months before classes began, instead of enrolling I went to Mexico to meet some friends, and there I landed--there really is no other way of seeing it, as it was such a coincidence--in the theater.
What would have happened if I had stayed to go to New York University?
 What direction would my life have taken if I had found success in acting instead of music? 
My path would have, without a doubt, been different. 
But I like to think that whether I had chosen acting, music, or dance, I would have somehow or other always chosen a path that in the end would make me feel happy and fulfilled. 
The truth is that what you do doesn't matter so much; what matters is that you love it and that you do it to the best of your ability.
Passion is a vital aspect of my existence. 
I consider myself to be a realistic dreamer, and my life is full of intense emotions. 
I live and feel deeply. 
Some people may think it is wrong to live life so passionately, but the truth is that ever since I was a very little boy, it has been passion that has propelled me on the extraordinary trajectory that has been my life, so I see no reason to stop it. 
Had I not embraced my instincts at a very young age, I think I would have never gotten to where I am today. 
To me, part of the beauty of childhood lies in the fact that it is a time of extremes: When we are happy, the happiness is absolute, and when we are sad, the pain is devastating. 
Life at that age is very intense, but at the same time it is also utterly pure and genuine. 
As we grow up, we learn how to soothe the emotions that are too overwhelming, and though to a certain degree I've also had to grow up, I have always made an effort to stay in touch with my inner child--that passionate, energetic, and happy child who was never afraid of anything.
