ABUELA
MY PARENTS SEPARATED when I was two years old. 
Needless to say I remember nothing of what was going on in my life at the time that happened, but I do know that I started spending a great deal of time with my grandparents on both my mother's and my father's sides. 
My grandparents played a key role in my life. 
I don't know if it's cultural or simply spiritual, but my relationship with them was always--and continues to be--very important to me. 
I will never forget what they taught me, and I will strive to pass their teaching on to my sons.
My paternal grandmother was an intelligent woman, independent and confident, a woman who was well ahead of her time. 
She was into metaphysics long before it became fashionable. 
She was also an artist; she painted and made sculptures. 
I remember her as always being busy, doing one of the thousands of things that interested her. 
She didn't understand the concept of "staying still" and always had some kind of project going on. 
My great-grandmother--her mother--was a teacher, so my grandmother was practically raised in a classroom, listening to her mother's lectures. 
She graduated from high school at fourteen, and even wrote two books and became a senior professor at the University of Puerto Rico. 
Remember, we are talking about a time when society dictated that most women could only aspire to be mothers or housewives. 
She was a surprising woman, so brave and such a visionary, that one day she decided to pack her bags and move to Boston to study education. 
In those times! But she moved to Boston and lived there until she graduated with a degree.
I recently had the opportunity to dine with Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina judge of the United States Supreme Court, and when I told her about my grandmother's accomplishments, she was shocked. 
"A Latina woman studying in Boston in the forties? 
Your grandmother must have been a strong woman," she said. 
And I of course felt very proud, because she was right: My grandmother was definitely an incredible lady.
Although she was born in Puerto Rico, my grandmother's family was originally from Corsica. 
We Corsicans are famous for being stubborn, and my grandmother was no exception: She was a very strong woman who was never afraid of anything. 
To me, she was always an example of what it means to be strong. 
For example, after fifty-some years of marriage, she realized she was no longer feeling fulfilled, so one day she got up and said to my grandfather: "You know what? I want a divorce." 
In those days people got married for life, "until death do us part." It wasn't like today, when people get divorced for almost any reason at all. 
But my grandmother didn't care what other people thought or said. For whatever reason, she wasn't happy and she decided to do something about it. 
So my grandparents got divorced. 
