Steve Jobs: Reflections on His Legacy
"Stay Hungry. Stay Foolish." 
The last Whole Earth Catalog came out in 1971, but in the fall of 1974 I published the Whole Earth Epilog. 
The back cover had an image of Earth from space, just a crescent with a bright sun on the horizon. 
There was also a big photo of a random road with a random railroad track, and above it were the words "Stay hungry. Stay foolish." 
Steve Jobs later described it as being a scene that a hitchhiker might encounter, and it's interesting that he would pick that up, because that's exactly what it was.
In 1990, Steve and I did an event for the Library of Congress. 
Afterward I sent him a signed copy of the Epilog. 
That's when I found out he was taking "Stay hungry. Stay foolish" as a mantra, this thing that I'd kind of tossed off back in the day. 
We never talked about it, but I think Steve was trying to keep some continuity with his youthful self and his youthful ideals. 
He may have taken it as a kind of core statement of hippiedom, a way to deal first with fame, then power, and then quite a lot of fortune.
Steve was too young to have been a hippie, of course. 
He almost missed the parade. 
But clearly he followed that track anyway-dropping out of school, wandering off to India barefoot in blue jeans. 
By the time of the Homebrew Computer Club in the 1970s, Whole Earth had moved on. 
Ken Kesey's Merry Pranksters had moved on. 
But Silicon Valley kind of throbbed with expectations, with permission to be original and creative. 
Stanford Research Institute was there, and so was the Stanford AI Lab and Xerox PARC. 
Steve was in the thick of the transition from druggy hippiedom to countercultural, sophisticated hackerdom. 
That part he did not miss.
ADVERTISING
The 1984 Super Bowl Ad
Alex Bogusky
Founding partner of ad firm Crispin Porter + Bogusky
Before Apple's 1984 Macintosh ad, companies were happy to run commercials during the Super Bowl. 
Afterward, they had to run "Super Bowl commercials." 
That legendary spot ushered in the notion that a company could alter its fortunes in just 60 seconds. 
It is widely considered the greatest commercial ever.
The year helped. 
Advertising was still largely a conventional, Madison Avenue affair in 1984. 
And the conventional thinking was that no agency would go near the dark, Orwellian overtones of 1984. 
Wrong emotions for an ad. 
But Chiat/Day was no conventional agency. 
Based in Los Angeles and led by creative director Lee Clow, the firm was helping to establish the West Coast style of advertising, marked by a new wave of filmmakers and rock music. 
In Steve Jobs, Clow had a fellow California upstart ready to take on the establishment. 
With a then-unheard-of budget of $900,000, Clow hired Ridley Scott, who was fresh off of Blade Runner, to direct.
The spot opened with a cinematic vision darker than anything we had been trained to expect from a commercial-sullen worker drones marching in lockstep. 
It was, well, Orwellian. 
But then there was a flash of color, a runner, gone almost too quickly for the mind to register. 
Then she reappeared, pursued and outnumbered but running with purpose-the empowered individual leading the rebellion. 
We didn't know who she was or what the ad was about; we just knew that we wanted her to prevail. 
When she released that hammer, we were hooked.
Why did the ad work so well? 
Because it wasn't about the features of a Macintosh. 
In fact, we never even saw a computer. 
Instead, it was about emotions, about how the Mac could change our relationship with computers. 
That was the only message that mattered, so that was all the ad was concerned with.
Apple parted ways with Chiat around the same time the company forced Jobs out. 
But when he returned in 1997, Jobs rehired the firm, and Clow helped reinvigorate the Apple brand with the "Think different" and "I'm a Mac" campaigns. 
As they had in 1984, Jobs and Clow homed in on the one sentiment that mattered for this brand and left the rest out. 
One ad. 
One idea. 
Again and again.
LIFE STORY
Steve Jobs and the Hero's Journey
George Lucas
Filmmaker
Steve Jobs had a vision. 
He believed in something that no one could see, and he followed that path wherever it led him, against all odds and against all doubters. 
Along the way he had real hurdles to overcome and real drama. 
He took his vision and built it into a company, but the people running the company couldn't see it. 
His own board didn't understand what he was doing. 
That's when the evil emperor thwarted him, you might say, and threw him into the dungeon.
At NeXT, Steve was in a sort of purgatory. 
I don't think NeXT was his primary vision-it was just what he could do at the time. 
He bought Pixar from me around then, too, but I think Pixar was just something that fascinated him-not something that drove him. 
Eventually the drought and famine and locusts descended upon Apple and they called him back.
That's when his story really became the hero's journey. 
He returned and reinstituted his vision. 
People were still confused and amazed and didn't really understand what he wanted to do. 
But a lot of the doubters were gone, and he created an army-one that was loyal to him, that believed in him. 
These were the people who actually did the amazing work. 
Steve was taking people where they had never gone before, and all he could say was "Trust me."
That kind of leadership-leadership with a vision that is bigger than any organization or any individual-doesn't happen all the time. 
But heroes and the stories about heroes center on this, a person with a vision of a different life, of other possibilities, of boldly going where no one has gone before, to quote another franchise.
DESIGN
The First Mouse
David Kelley
Founder, IDEO
Steve cared about everything. 
He had this vigilance. 
He wanted to delight the user.
My team and I had the privilege of designing the first commercial mouse with Steve. 
I remember that our original prototype used a steel ball, and when you rolled it on the table it could be fairly loud. 
Steve said that was unacceptable, so we had to coat the ball in rubber, which was a project in itself. 
But that kind of feedback is a dream for designers-that somebody cares that much.
Picture the normal situation, where we are designing something for a company. 
The CEO cares about the product, but not in the way that I and the other designers do-about all the tiny little details that make up the experience. They're not concerned with the coatings on the screws or how something feels in your hand. 
Steve was.
In many ways that was his biggest influence: He showed how important it is to pay attention to every aspect of every product. 
And in doing so, he set the bar for what great design can and should be. 
Everybody else has had to step up, and they've had to keep on stepping up. 
Steve demonstrated that design can lead a company to greatness.
PRESENTATION
Master of the Stage
Steve Jobs is famous for his keynotes. 
And of course he was wonderful when he unveiled the iCloud and the iPad 2 earlier this year. 
But by then, he was already "Steve Jobs." At some point, when the Rolling Stones walk onstage, people cheer. 
But in 1984, he still had to earn it. 
And he did it with pure showbiz.
Even then, in that first keynote when he introduced the Mac, Steve Jobs knew the importance of keeping secrets and the element of surprise. 
Everybody thinks they outgrow that. 
The film industry has decided that surprise doesn't matter at all-they'll show you the "Luke, I'm your father" moment in the trailer. 
But as a magician, I think about the use of secrets and surprise all the time. 
It's astonishing how well they work. 
What I find so fascinating is that, while Jobs was sophisticated and the ideas he was selling were deeply intellectual, he was using tactics that play right into our monkey brains.
He structured this announcement so well. 
He's got something in a bag. 
And the word bag is funny, it's humble. 
It is also not a clich：：. 
Box would have been a clich：：. 
Holding it in my hand would have been a clich：：. 
But bag makes it so personal and honest and childlike. 
And then he takes the computer out of the bag and it speaks-and it refers to Jobs as its father, which anthropomorphizes it and makes it cute and gentle.
If you gave that routine to any other CEO, they would say, "I need 30 more jokes in there." But Jobs had the confidence not to do that. 
When Teller and I first played off-Broadway, it was wonderful to go onstage and start our show kind of slowly and easily, knowing that in 50 minutes the audience was going to like us. 
And Jobs was the same way that day in 1984. He didn't come in clapping his hands and going, "Whoa whoa whoa, have we got something for you!" 
He knew that the way to do it is nice and easy and slow.
Dai Vernon, who revolutionized magic in the 20th century, said that onstage, movements should be natural. 
That's something that very few people in magic understand and very few public speakers understand. 
But Jobs follows that completely. 
There's nothing about the way he moves that you wouldn't do in a living room. 
Watch the way he pulls the disk out of his pocket and slides it into the front of the Mac. 
It's not too slick. 
He slides it in like bread into a toaster.
So: He didn't do too much buildup. 
He let the surprise sell itself. 
He did just a few jokes and he did them very well. 
And then he got the fuck off the stage. 
You could structure a 15-minute magic show exactly the same way.
FONTS
The Typographer's Dream
Rick Valicenti
Founder, Thirst
In the late '80s, we moved into a new loft studio. 
On day two I showed up to discover a body-sized, body-shaped hole in the drywall. 
Someone had broken in and stolen the massive IBM computers we used for accounting and administrative tasks. 
As replacements, we purchased the little Mac SE. 
We referred to it as R2-D2.
The first project we did was a poster for the Chicago Museum of Contemporary Art, promoting a T-shirt contest. 
At the time, I was looking closely at the design work of April Greiman, an early adopter of Apple technology, and wondering, where did she get that type? I learned quickly, as soon as I turned on the Mac, that the font was called Geneva, and I immediately used it for the museum poster. 
That was my first Mac typesetting job.
I felt liberated and could do just about anything with that machine and the models that followed. 
To this day, it's just mind-blowing, the revolution that Steve Jobs set off. 
Obviously, the seminal experience he had in that calligraphy class at Reed College opened his eyes to the nuances of typography-and that led him to transform and refine the way we communicate.
The typesetting development software that is now available for use on Apple's platform is so precise that today's typographers can make adjustments within fractions of a point. 
This precision has encouraged the highest level of typographic craft in history.
The intuitive operating systems Jobs created have democratized font design. 
Right now there's an avalanche of incredibly beautiful typefaces from all over the world that could only be designed on a Mac. 
