Jack Welch 20
During my senior year, I was being courted by many different companies. I had lots of good offers. 
But my professors convinced me to go to graduate school. 
I turned down the corporate offers and decided to go to the University of Illinois at Champaign, where I was offered a fellowship. 
The school was consistently ranked among the top five graduate programs in chemical engineering. It was a great school for my major.
I had been on campus no more than two weeks when I met a pretty girl and asked her out. 
Our Saturday night date went so well that we ended up just off a campus parking lot in the woods. 
The windows in my VW had gotten foggy when all of a sudden a light flashed through. 
It was the campus police, and we were caught in an awkward position. 
I froze, terrified of the consequences.
In those days, things were quite different. 
The 1950s were conservation times, and we were in the conservative Midwest. 
The police took us both down to the campus station and kept us there until four or five in the morning before sending us home.
My life flashed before me. 
I thought I was about to lose everything??my fellowship, my chance to get a graduate degree, my career. 
But most of all, I thought about my mother's reaction when she found out what I had done. 
My fate would be decided after a Monday meeting with the university provost, who would determine the disciplinary action.
On Sunday morning, I gathered up the nerve to call the chairman of the Chemical Engineering Department, Dr. Harry Drickamer. 
I knew him only by his gruff reputation. 
Scared as I was, I thought he was my only hope.
"Dr. Drickamer,"I said, "I have a real problem. 
The campus police caught me messing around. I'm devastated by it, and I need help." 
I was practically wetting my pants telling him what had happened.
"Damn,"he responded.
"Of all the graduate students I've had here, you are the first guy to do something like that. 
I' ll take care of this, but you better keep your pants on from now on!" 
Whatever Drickamer did saved my butt. 
I still had to go through a difficult meeting with the provost, but I wasn't thrown out of the school. 
Yet that frightening incident got me much closer to Harry. We formed a wonderful relationship. 
He, too, treated me like a son. 
We bet on football games. We argued over things in the news. 
In the hallways, Harry would tease me mercilessly, always ragging me about the Red Sox or my already thinning hair.
He became an important influence in my life, a mentor throughout my graduate years. 
I needed the help. 
At Illinois, I wasn't as well prepared as the kids from Brooklyn Polytechnic, Columbia, of Minnesota. 
So in my first year, I struggled there as well. 
I had to really fight for my grades. I wasn't by any stretch of the imagination a star.
