Jack Welch 22
I have always felt that chemical engineering was one of the best backgrounds for a business career, because both the classwork and required thesis teach you one very important lesson: there are no finite answers to many questions. 
A typical exam question went something like this: an ice-skater weighs 150 pounds and is doing figure-eights on ice an inch thick. 
The temperature is rising a degree every ten minutes to 40 degrees, and the wind is blowing 20 miles an hour. When will the skater fall through the ice?
There was no formulaic answer to that question.
The same is true for most business problem. 
The process helps you get closer to the darker shade of gray. There are rarely black-or-white answers. 
More often than not, business is smell, feel, and touch as much as or more than numbers. 
If we wait for the perfect answer, the world will pass us by.
By the time I left Illinois in 1960, I had decided what I liked and wanted to do and, just as important, what I wasn't so good at. My technical skills were pretty good, but I wasn't the best scientist by any means. 
Compared to many of my classmates, I was outgoing, someone who loved people more than books, and sports more than scientific developments. 
I figured those skills and interests were best suited for a job that bridged the laboratory and the commercial world.
Knowing that was a little bit like knowing I was a pretty good athlete, but far from a very good one. 
What I wanted to do made me something different from most Ph.D.s. They usually went into university classrooms to teach or corporate laboratories to do research. 
I toyed with the idea of teaching, and even interviewed at Syracuse and West Virginia Universities, but in the end I decided against that option.
Besides a degree, long-term friendships, and a way of thinking through problems, Illinois gave me something else: a great wife. 
I first spotted Carolyn Osburn at the Catholic church on-campus doing the Stations of the Cross during Lent. 
She attended mass, just as I did. 
I didn't meet her, however, until a mutual friend introduced us in a bar in downtown Champaign.
Carolyn was tall, pretty, sophisticated and intelligent. 
She had graduated with honors from Marietta College and was on a $1,500-a-year fellowship at Illinois, getting her master's in English literature. 
After our first date at a basketball game in January 1959, we were always together. 
Five months later, we were engaged and on November 21, two days after my 24th birthday, we were married in her hometown of Arlington Heights, Illinois.
We spent the bulk of our honeymoon driving my Volkswagen across the country and into Canada, with me interviewing for jobs. 
