The life of Amelia Earhart
For my tenth birthday, I got the present of my dreams: a piece of Amelia Earhart luggage. 
It was a small overnight case made of aluminum, with rounded corners, and covered in blue vinyl. 
Between the latches was a little plaque with an ersatz, feminine signature. (Earhart's actual signature was loopy and uneven, with a runic-looking "A.") 
I had nowhere to go, so I kept the case under my bed and filled it with dolls' clothes-a use, I suspect, of which Earhart would have disapproved. 
Play that prepared a young girl for domesticity was anathema to her ideals. 
When she lectured at colleges-as she did frequently, to promote careers for women, especially in aviation-she urged the coeds to focus on majors dominated by men, like engineering, and to postpone marriage until they had got a degree. 
On Earhart's own wedding day, in 1931, the thirty-three-year-old bride handed her forty-three-year-old groom, George Palmer Putnam, a remarkable letter, which read:
You must know again my reluctance to marry, my feeling that I shatter thereby chances in work which means so much to me. . . . 
In our life together I shall not hold you to any medieval code of faithfulness to me, nor shall I consider myself bound to you similarly. . . . 
I may have to keep some place where I can go to be myself now and then, for I cannot guarantee to endure at all the confinements of even an attractive cage.
The place where Earhart went to be herself was the cockpit of a plane, and that may have been the place where she died. 
On July 2, 1937, she became the world's most famous missing person when her twin-engine Lockheed Electra disappeared in the vicinity of Howland Island, a speck in the Pacific about midway between Australia and Hawaii, where the Department of the Interior had built her a landing strip. 
She and her navigator, Fred Noonan, were attempting to circumnavigate the equator, a feat for the record books, although pilots before them (all male) had rounded the globe at least six times by shorter routes, and commercial transpacific air service had recently been inaugurated. 
Critics accused Earhart posthumously of embarking on a capricious joyride that ultimately cost taxpayers millions of dollars, the estimated tab for a huge rescue mission authorized by President Roosevelt, Earhart's fan and friend. 
Even some of her staunchest admirers disapproved of the last flight. Earhart's biographer Susan Butler quotes one of them, Captain Hilton Railey, who had helped to launch her career. 
She was, he wrote, "caught up in the hero racket."
Earhart, however, was a heroic figure to millions of her contemporaries, and she still counts as one. 
She achieved fame dramatically, in 1928, as the first woman to cross the Atlantic in a plane, the Friendship, albeit only as a passenger. 
Railey had recruited her on behalf of Mrs. Frederick E. Guest, n¡§?e Amy Phipps, a steel heiress and sportswoman who was underwriting the expedition. 
She had planned to play the starring role herself, until her husband, a former British Cabinet minister, expressed his alarm (three women fliers, including a princess, had recently perished in crashes). 
Railey was commissioned to find a substitute, and Guest stipulated that, ideally, she should be an aviator but, more important, "the right sort of girl." (The wrong sort of girl was her rival in the race to Europe, Mabel Boll, a flamboyant former actress who was known as the Queen of Diamonds. 
As Guest later put it to her daughter, "It just wouldn't do.")
Wilmer (Bill) Stultz, the pilot of the Friendship, who had defected from the Boll party, and Louis (Slim) Gordon, the mechanic, had done the actual flying, and Earhart tried to remind a besotted press and ecstatic crowds hailing her as "Lady Lindy" that she had really been just "a sack of potatoes." 
In 1932, however, she legitimatized the title by flying the Atlantic on her own, becoming the first woman and the second person, five years after Charles Lindbergh, to do so. 
(Congress awarded her honorary Major Wings that she wore with her pearls.)
 In 1935, she was the first pilot to solo across the Pacific-from Honolulu to Oakland-and to solo non-stop from Los Angeles to Mexico.
Earhart also made or broke a slew of other records, and few Americans would not have recognized her in the street. 
Her image was managed aggressively by Putnam, a scion of the publishing house G. P. Putnam's Sons, and one of the first ¡§?ber-agents. 
He specialized in celebrity true-life adventure stories, and he had signed up Lindbergh to chronicle his flight to Paris for the Times (which paid him sixty thousand dollars), then turned the articles into a book that sold some six hundred thousand copies. 
Even before Putnam met Earhart, he had caught wind of the Guest project-and his next best-seller. 
By the time the Friendship took off, he had a ten-thousand-dollar deal for Earhart's firsthand story, and a file of publicity shots that played up her resemblance to Lindbergh. (They were both lean, fair Midwesterners with winning smiles.) 
Her legend, to a large degree, was Putnam's creation. 
He brokered her lecture tours, book contracts, columns, product endorsements, and media exposure, and he was so proprietary that a rival of Earhart's described him as her Svengali. 
She, however, was the real mesmerist. 
"Amelia Earhart: Image and Icon," a handsomely designed album of their teamwork as self-promoters-portraits, press clippings, ads, and illustrations-was published two years ago, with notes and commentary by the editors, Kristen Lubben and Erin Barnett, and essays by Butler and Susan Ware.
Ware regards Earhart's pose of Lindberghian diffidence with critical amusement. 
She quotes the great aviator Elinor Smith, who was still flying in 2001, at eighty-nine: "Amelia was about as shy as Muhammad Ali." 
The abuse of the term "icon" incites iconoclasm, or ought to. 
Earhart was saintlike only as a martyr to her own ambition, who became an object of veneration and is periodically resurrected-her unvarnished glamour, like a holy man's body, still miraculously fresh. 
Embraced by feminists, she was featured on a 1976 cover of Ms., which promised a story "BETTER THAN THE MYTH." 
Read closely, however, Earhart's life is, in part, the story of a charismatic dilettante who lectured college girls about ambition yet never bothered to earn a degree. 
In the nineteen-nineties, Apple and the Gap both featured her in ad campaigns-the Gap to sell khaki trousers, Apple to promote its corporate image of nonconformity. 
The slogan that appeared with a gauzy, doe-eyed photograph of Earhart in a white helmet was "Think Different." (She thought of herself not only as different but as a special case to whom most ground rules didn't apply.) 
Three Hollywood movies, starring Rosalind Russell, Diane Keaton, and Amy Adams, have told a version of her story, and a new one, "Amelia," directed by Mira Nair, with Hilary Swank in the title role and Richard Gere as Putnam, will open in October. 
The script is based on two biographies, "The Sound of Wings," by Mary Lovell (1989), and Butler's definitive "East to the Dawn" (1997); and on "Amelia Earhart: The Mystery Solved" (1999), by Elgen M. Long, a veteran pilot, and his wife, Marie K. Long. 
(All three books are being reissued this fall.)
There were, in fact, other famous female aces in the early decades of aviation. 
All of them were daring-some were said to be better pilots than Earhart-and many of them were killed and forgotten. 
If Earhart became an "icon," it was, in part, because women who aspired to excel in any sphere, at a high altitude, looked upon her as their champion. 
But it was also because the unburied come back to haunt us.
Earhart had already tried to circle the globe once in 1937, flying westward from Oakland, but she had crashed taking off in Honolulu. 
Determined to try again, she coaxed additional funds from her sponsors, and "more or less mortgaged the future," she wrote. 
The plane, hyped as a "flying laboratory" (it wasn't clear what she planned to test, beyond her own mettle and earning power), was shipped back to California for repairs, and, once Putnam had renegotiated the necessary landing clearances and technical support, she and Noonan set off again, on June 1st, this time flying eastward-weather patterns had changed. 
A month and more than twenty-two thousand miles later, they had reached Lae, New Guinea, the jumping-off place for the longest and most dangerous lap of the journey. 
The Electra's fuel tanks could keep them aloft for, at most, twenty-four hours, so they had almost no margin of error in pinpointing Howland, about twenty-five hundred miles away. 
Noonan was using a combination of celestial navigation and dead reckoning. 
They had a radio, but its range was limited.
Early on July 2nd, on a slightly overcast morning, about eighteen hours into the flight, Earhart told radiomen on the Itasca, a Coast Guard cutter stationed off Howland to help guide her down, that she was flying at a thousand feet and should soon be "on" them, but that her fuel was low. 
Although the Itasca had been broadcasting its position, so that Noonan could take his bearings and, if necessary, correct the course, they apparently couldn't receive the transmissions, nor apparently could they see the billows of black smoke that the cutter was pumping out. 
Earhart's last message was logged at 8:43 A.M. 
No authenticated trace of the Electra, or of its crew, has ever been found.
After twenty-five years of research, the Longs concluded that "a tragic sequence of events"-human error, faulty equipment, miscommunication-"doomed her flight from the beginning," and that Earhart and Noonan were forced to ditch in shark-infested waters close to Howland, where the plane sank or broke up. 
There is, however, an alternative scenario-a chapter from Robinson Crusoe. 
It is supported with methodical, if controversial, research by Ric Gillespie, the author of "Finding Amelia" (2006), which has just been republished.
Gillespie is a former airline crash investigator who is notably unimpressed with his subject. 
(He describes Earhart as an "average" pilot and has little interest in her life or achievements.) 
He has distanced himself from the kooks and the conspiracy theorists who have suggested, at different times, that Earhart was on a hushed-up mission to spy on the Japanese, who interned her; that she became Tokyo Rose; or that she returned secretly to America and lived out her days as a housewife in New Jersey. 
In 1988, he launched the Earhart Project, which is devoted to solving what he calls the "Holy Grail of aviation mysteries." 
Gillespie recently announced that next May he will lead his ninth expedition to the Pacific island where he believes that Earhart landed, and, for a while, survived as a castaway.
Nikumaroro, formerly Gardner Island, is an atoll about four hundred miles southeast of Howland. 
At low tide, it is surrounded by a broad, flat apron of coral where a plane could safely touch down. 
The interior is covered with dense tropical vegetation bordering a lagoon. 
In 1929, a steamer went aground on the reef, and when its crew was rescued it left behind a cache of provisions. 
The atoll was deserted until 1938, when it became one of the last outposts of the British Empire to be colonized, and was settled by natives of the Gilbert Islands. 
(A prolonged drought forced the inhabitants to abandon Nikumaroro in the nineteen-sixties.)
In 1940, a colonial administrator and his work party found a liqueur bottle and some corks, a human skull and some bones, the partial sole of a woman's shoe, parts of a man's shoe, and a sextant box. 
(Noonan had a mariner's sextant on board.)
A year later, the skull and the bones were examined by a British doctor on Fiji. 
The relics subsequently vanished, but when the doctor's notes came to light, in the nineteen-nineties, they were reviewed by forensic anthropologists. 
