Sylvia Plath: A Biographical Note
The BellJarwas first published in London in January 1963 by William Heinemann Limited, under the pseudonym Victoria Lucas. 
Sylvia Plath had adopted the pen name for publication of her first novel because she questioned its literary value and did not believe it was a "serious work"; she was also worried about the pain publication might cause to the many people close to her whose personalities she had distorted and lightly disguised in the book.
The central themes of Sylvia Plath's early life are the basis for The Bell Jar. 
She was born in 1932 in Massachusetts and spent her early childhood years in Winthrop, a seaside town close to Boston. 
Her mother's parents were Austrian; her father, a distinguished professor of biology at Boston University (and an internationally known authority on bees), had emigrated to the States from Poland as an adolescent; she had one brother, two and a half years younger.
A radical change occurred in Sylvia's life when she was eight: in November 1940, her father died after a long, difficult illness, and the mother and grandparents moved the family inland to the town of Wellesley, a conservative upper-middle-class suburb of Boston.
While the grandmother assumed the care of the household, Mrs. Plath taught students in the medical-secretarial training program at Boston University, commuting each day, and the grandfather worked as maitre d'hotel at the Brookline Country Club, where he lived during the week. 
Sylvia and her brother attended the local public schools. 
"I went to public schools," she wrote later, "genuinely public. 
Everyone went."
At an early age she began to write poems and to draw in pen and ink -- and to collect prizes with her first publication of each. 
By the time she was seventeen, her interest in writing had become disciplined and controlled. 
Publication, however, did not come easily; she had submitted forty-five pieces to the magazine Seventeen before her first short story, "And Summer Will Not Come Again," was published in the August 1950 issue.
A poem, "Bitter Strawberries," a sardonic comment on war, was accepted and published in the same month by the Christian Science Monitor. 
In her high school year book, The Wellesleyan, the girl who later described herself as a "rabid teenage pragmatist" was pictured:
Warm smile... energetic worker... 
Bumble Boogie piano special... 
Clever with chalk and paints... 
Weekends at Williams... 
Those fully packed sandwiches... 
Future writer... 
Those rejection slips fromSeventeen ... 
Oh, for a license.
In September 1950, Sylvia entered Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts, the largest women's college in the world. 
She went on scholarship -- one from the Wellesley Smith Club and one endowed by Olive Higgins Prouty, the novelist and author ofStella Dallas, later a friend and patron. 
These were the years in which Sylvia wrote poetry on a precise schedule, circled words in the red-leather thesaurus which had belonged to her father, maintained a detailed journal, kept a diligent scrapbook, and studied with concentration.
Highly successful as a student, she was also elected to class and college offices; she became a member of the editorial board of The Smith Review, went for weekends to men's colleges, and published stories and poems in Seventeen. 
But at the time she wrote in a letter: "for the few little outward successes I may seem to have, there are acres of misgivings and self-doubt." 
Of this period a friend later said: "It was as if Sylvia couldn't wait for life to come to her... She rushed out to greet it, to make things happen."
As she became increasingly conscious of herself as a woman, the conflict between the life-style of a poet/intellectual and that of a wife and mother became a central preoccupation, and she wrote: "...it's quite amazing how I've gone around for most of my life as in the rarefied atmosphere under a bell jar." 
In August 1951 she won Mademoiselle magazine's fiction contest with a short story, "Sunday at the Mintons," and in the following year, her junior year in college, Sylvia was awarded two Smith poetry prizes and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and to Alpha, the Smith College honorary society for the arts.
Then in the summer of 1952 she was chosen to be a guest editor inMademoiselle's College Board Contest. 
In her scrapbook, she described the beginning of that month in New York in the breathy style of the magazine:
After being one of the two national winners of Mademoiselle's fiction contest ($500!) last August, I felt that I was coming home again when I won a guest editorship representing Smith & took a train to NYC for a salaried month working -- hatted & heeled -- in Mlle's airconditioned Madison Ave. offices... 
Fantastic, fabulous, and all other inadequate adjectives go to describe the four gala and chaotic-weeks I worked as guest managing Ed... 
living in luxury at the Barbizon, I edited, met celebrities, was feted and feasted by a galaxy of UN delegates, simultaneous interpreters & artists... an almost unbelievable merry-go-round month -- this Smith Cinderella met idols: Vance Bourjaily, Paul Engle, Elizabeth Bowen -- wrote article via correspondence with 5 handsome young male poet teachers.
The poets were Alistair Reid, Anthony Hecht, Richard Wilbur, George Steiner, and William Burford, whose pictures were accompanied by biographical notes and comments on poets and poetry.
After 230-odd pages of advertising, the bulk of the August 1953 college issue was introduced by Sylvia as Guest Managing Editor with "Mlle's last word on college, '53." 
Under a vapid picture of the guest editors holding hands in star formations, dressed alike in tartan skirts with matching Eton caps and open-mouthed smiles, she wrote:
We're stargazers this season, bewitched by an atmosphere of evening blue. 
Foremost in the fashion constellation we spotMlle's own tartan, the astronomic versatility of sweaters, and men, men, men -- we've even taken the shirts off their backs! 
Focusing our telescope on college news around the globe, we debate and deliberate. 
Issues illuminated: academic freedom, the sorority controversy, our much labeled (and libeled) generation. 
From our favorite fields, stars of the first magnitude shed a bright influence on our plans for jobs and futures. 
Although horoscopes for our ultimate orbits aren't yet in, we Guest Eds. are counting on a favorable forecast with this send-off fromMlle, the star of the campus.
No doubt she was far more pleased with page 358 -- "Mlle.finally published 'Mad Girl's Lovesong' -- my favorite villanelle": 
That summer, too,Harper's Magazine paid $100 for three poems which Sylvia identified as "first professional earnings." 
Later, assessing these bubbling achievements, she wrote, "All in all, I felt upborne on a wave of creative, social and financial success -- The six month crash, however, was to come --"
These were the events which took place in her life in the summer and autumn of 1953 -- at the time of the electrocution of the Rosenbergs, at the time when Senator Joseph McCarthy was forcing his power, at the beginning of the Eisenhower presidency -- these were the events which Sylvia Plath reconstructed inThe Bell Jar. 
Years later she described the book she wanted to write:
The pressures of the fashion magazine world which seems increasingly superficial and artificial, the return home to the dead summer world of a suburb of Boston. 
Here the cracks in her [the heroine, Esther Greenwood's] nature which had been held together as it were by the surrounding pressures of New York widen and gape alarmingly. 
More and more her warped view of the world around?-- her own vacuous domestic life, and that of her neighbors -- seems the one right way of looking at things.
For Sylvia then came electroshock therapy and finally her well-publicized disappearance, subsequent discovery and consequent hospitalization for psychotherapy and more shock treatment. 
She wrote: "A time of darkness, despair, disillusion -- so black only as the inferno of the human mind can be -- symbolic death, and numb shock -- then the painful agony of slow rebirth and psychic regeneration."
Subsequently Sylvia returned to Smith College and reconquered "old broncos that threw me for a loop last year." 
At the beginning of the next summer she wrote that "a semester of reconstruction ends with an infinitely more solid if less flashingly spectacular flourish than last year's."
By the end of the next academic year, she had sold more poems, earned additional prizes, and written her long paper for English honors on the double personality in Dostoyevski's novels.
In June 1955 she graduated from Smith Collegesumma cum laude with the prospect of an English Fulbright year in Newnham College at Cambridge University.
There Sylvia met the British poet Ted Hughes, whom she married in London on June 16, 1956: Bloomsday. 
Sylvia's Fulbright was renewed and, after a vacation in Spain, Ted and Sylvia lived in Cambridge for another year.
Then, in the spring of 1957, they moved to the United States, where Sylvia was assessed by her colleagues as "one of the two or three finest instructors ever to appear in the English department at Smith College."
It is probable that Sylvia already had a version of The Bell Jar in her trunks when she returned to the States, but she was concentrating on poetry and on teaching.
In June 1958, she applied for a Eugene F. Saxton Memorial Fellowship to complete her book of poems. 
The Saxton Fellowship had been established "to honor an outstanding editor of Harper & Brothers"; the trust, at the discretion of the trustees, gave outright grants of money to writers for living expenses. 
Agreement of all three trustees was necessary to make the grant, and one of them, who called the sample poems "beyond reproach," noted that "in looking over Mrs. Hughes' history, I see that she has had valuable awards dropped into her lap during most of her adult life. 
Perhaps it would not do her any real harm to continue her work for a while as a teacher in a fine college. 
My impulse is rejection, though I think the quality of her work entitles her to serious consideration." In October 1958 the application was rejected with a special letter from the secretary to the trustees, who wanted Mrs. Hughes to know that "your application aroused more than ordinary interest. 
The talent -- which is marked -- was not a matter for dispute but rather the nature of the project."
Meanwhile the Hugheses had moved to a small apartment on Beacon Hill, "living on a shoestring for a year in Boston writing to see what we could do." 
Sylvia had made the difficult decision to give up teaching, and to discard an academic plan for which she had been groomed since childhood, in exchange for a less certain existence but one which she hoped would give her more time to write. 
However, as the year progressed, and her book of poems was repeatedly submitted and rejected under ever-changing tides, she wrote:
Nothing stinks like a pile of unpublished writing, which remark I guess shows I still don't have a pure motive (O it's-such-fun-I-just-can't-stop-who-cares-if-it's-published-or-read) about writing... 
I still want to see it finally ritualized in print.
In December 1959, Ted and Sylvia returned to England to live. 
In April 1960 their first child, Freda, was born. 
At last Sylvia's book of poetry,The Colossus, was accepted for fall publication by William Heinemann Limited. 
Subsequently Sylvia suffered a miscarriage, then an appendectomy, and then became pregnant again.
On May 1, 1961, she again applied for a Eugene F. Saxton Fellowship; this time in order to finish a novel which she described as one-sixth completed -- about fifty pages. 
On the application Sylvia had asked for money to cover "babysitter or nanny at about $5 a day, 6 days a week for a year, $1,560. 
Rent of study at about $10 a week: $520 for a year. 
