Gregory Smith
Gregory Smith - sounds like an ordinary name, doesn't it. 
In fact, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, Smith is one of the most commonly occurring surnames in the United States. 
It's in the top five. 
Actually, it's number one. 
And, the name "Gregory" is in the top 40 for the most commonly occurring first names. 
Yes, it is an ordinary name. 
But as it turns out, Gregory Smith is anything but ordinary.
Gregory Smith has a college degree. 
To be specific, he graduated Cum Laude with a BS in Mathematics and minors in both History and Biology with Honors. 
OK, you're probably thinking, "Lots of people have college degrees - that's not so extraordinary." 
Keep reading.
Smith looks at education as a firm foundation for his future, "The academic foundation I am building will interconnect throughout my future as I aspire to make lasting contributions for the benefit of my country and to be of service to the world." Right now, he is working on a graduate degree in math at the University of Virginia. 
Smith received an important scholarship -- The Jack Kent Cooke award -- that should be enough to pay for graduate school. 
It will provide up to $50,000 per year to complete his PhD. 
Reportedly, this won't be Smith's only graduate degree. 
He also plans to study biomedical research, aerospace engineering and international relations at the graduate level. 
Again, you're probably thinking, "Hey, other people go to graduate school and get good scholarships." That's true, but keep reading.
Smith is the co-chair for the World of Children Awards. 
He's in good company -- the other chair is three-time heavyweight boxing champion, Muhammad Ali. 
The World of Children Awards recognizes people who dedicate their lives to helping children all around the world. 
The fact that Smith is co-chairing such an event is not surprising; he founded International Youth Advocates (IYA). 
The mission of IYA is to protect young people from violent situations and to help promote good educational services and living conditions for kids. 
The organization does this by working with other key groups like the Christian Children's Fund and the World Centers of Compassion for Children. 
Together, they collect everything from educational material to clothing to medical supplies and deliver it to people all around the world. 
Yeah, we know, "Other people have started worthwhile organizations like this." 
Just keep reading, please.
Gregory Smith has spoken before the United Nations as a delegate for the very first children's summit. 
He's been nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize - three times. 
The first nomination was in 2002, the second in 2003, and the third in 2004. 
Smith has been in the company of and worked closely with several of today's most notable leaders and other political figures. 
Among those on the lengthy list are former U.S. President Bill Clinton, former Russian President Michel Gorbachev, 1984 Nobel Peace Prize Winner Desmond Tutu and 1976 Nobel Peace Laureate Betty Williams. 
Now you're starting to get the picture. 
Not everyone gets nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize. 
But, you'll want to keep reading. It gets even more impressive. Promise.
Smith is a spokesperson for the World Centers of Compassion for Children and an ambassador for the Christian Children's Fund. 
His official titles are "Youth Spokesman" and "Youth Ambassador," respectively. 
You see, Gregory Smith is only 15 years old. 
Yes, that's right -- 15 years old. 
Gregory Smith has accomplished more than most people twice his age - even many three times his age. 
Now you're probably doing the math, "If he's 15 now and already in graduate school, then he had to be like 11 or something when he started college." 
Actually, he was ten.
Here are just a few of the stats of Greg's personal timeline: 
Born June 9, 1989.
Age five: Enrolled in public school.
Age ten: Graduated from Orange Park High School in Orange Park, Florida (Yes, he squeezed an entire K-12 education in less than half the normally required time.) Joined the freshman class of Randolph-Macon College in Virginia in September
Age 11: Named Youth Spokesperson for World Centers of Compassion for Children
Age 12: Nominated for 2002 Nobel Peace Prize, made Youth Ambassador for Christian Children's Fund
Age 13: Nominated for 2003 Nobel Peace Prize, graduated Cum Laude with a BS in mathematics and minors in both history and biology with honors from Randolph-Macon College, presented with the "Force For Good Lifetime Achievement Award"
Age 14: Awarded a Jack Kent Cooke Scholarship for Graduate Studies, totaling up to $50,000 each year, began graduate study in math at University of Virginia, nominated for the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize, named International Humanitarian of the Year by the Lion's Club, presented with the National Caring Award
All this and he's pretty modest, too. 
This is what Greg has to say about himself:
Photo courtesy Smith family
I have been given a special gift which gives me the incredible capability to learn and retain what I have learned. 
It is important to remember that I do not know everything; in fact, I know very little in the big picture of wisdom and knowledge. 
I am working very hard and thoroughly enjoying my quest for knowledge! 
My pursuit of knowledge is not a contest to see who is smarter or who has the highest grades. 
It is a search for answers to questions that perplex society and lead us down a violent path ending in a peaceless life. 
I want to reverse this cycle.
You might expect him to be stuffy. 
Reporters, interviewers (like David Letterman and Oprah Winfrey) and others don't think so. 
Other people worry about a childhood lost in the classroom. 
His parents disagree. 
And, more importantly, so does Greg. 
When asked what he likes to do for fun, Greg has responded, "Learning is fun. Reading is fun." 
Hey, in many ways, he's also a regular kid. 
He finished that question, adding, "I enjoy playing games with friends -- playing football, tennis, basketball, soccer and computer games."
