The Amazing Life of Lady Cathcart
For most holidaymakers, a visit to Ireland should be an unforgettable experience, and that is certainly the description Lady Elizabeth Cathcart would have used to describe her first, and last, visit to its shores back in 1746.
Born in 1691, the daughter of a London brewer, Elizabeth Malyn was described as 'a picture of youth, health, beauty, and modesty' by one of her many ardent admirers. 
Her first marriage was to James Fleet, the son of the Lord Mayor of London. 
When he died in 1733, leaving her Tewin Water, a large mansion in the county of Hertfordshire, she married her next-door neighbour, Colonel Sabine, a brother of the governor of Gibraltar. 
This second union lasted six years, and, on the death of Colonel Sabine, she married Lord Cathcart, a governor of Londonderry and commander of the British forces in America. 
He died, a year later, of endemic fever whilst leading an unsuccessful military expedition in the West Indies. 
Confiding to a close friend, Lady Cathcart said that her first marriage had been to please her parents, her second for money, and her third for a title. 
Indeed, she declared, if she married a fourth time, it would be for love.
In 1745, on a visit to Bath, she met Colonel Hugh Maguire, a dashing, handsome, officer in the service of the Queen of Hungary, and a descendant of the Maguires of Tempo in County Fermanagh. 
He was not at all discouraged by the fifteen-year gap in their ages, and she readily accepted his proposal of marriage. 
It must have been true love, for just prior to meeting Maguire, who was a catholic, she had contributed ?200 to an anti-popery society. 
Ever charming and attentive, he willingly agreed to her choice of an amusing inscription within the wedding ring: "If I survive, I will have five". 
This, of course, referred to husbands rather than children for she was then 55 years of age. 
From the events, which follow, however, she was not encouraged to fulfil this resolution.
Having returned from the honeymoon to Tewin Water, she soon discovered that she had made a dreadful mistake. 
Hugh Maguire was passionately in love, but only with her fortune. 
He seized all the money on which he could lay his hands, and then demanded the deeds of the property. 
Lady Cathcart, however, managed to hide these in a compartment behind a secret door in one of her favourite rooms. 
She also concealed items of jewellery by plaiting some into her hair and quilting others into her petticoats. 
Then, one warm September morning, while they were out for a coach ride, Maguire informed her that they would not be returning home, but that they were on the high road to Holyhead bound for Ireland.
At Tewin Water, there was consternation at their disappearance. 
In his diary, her gardener noted that two geese had been prepared that day for her Ladyship and the Colonel. 
Rather than see the lunch go to waste, the servants had sat down and helped themselves. 
Well, wouldn't we all? 
A day or two later, some of the Colonel's men appeared and stripped the house of many fixtures and fittings. 
An attorney was despatched with a writ of Habeas Corpus and he overtook the couple at an inn in Chester. 
Maguire, however, had one of his mistresses impersonate Lady Cathcart and inform the attorney that she was going to Ireland of her own free will. 
He also arranged for three men to follow the attorney and to steal the writ. 
With their tracks safely covered, the Maguires crossed the sea to Ireland.
Maguire had property at Castle Nugent in Co Longford and it is more than likely that he held Lady Cathcart there while she was forced to alter her will making him the main benefactor "in acknowledgement of the tender and affectionate regard which he has always shown for her". 
This will was executed in Dublin in October 1746. 
After that, their journey continued northwards to Tempo, a small hamlet in Co. Fermanagh, to a large house on an estate, which Maguire had purchased from his brother with the help of money, procured from Lady Cathcart. 
Upon her arrival at Tempo, she was confined to a 'barrack' or large guest room and there she remained for almost twenty years being allowed only the bare necessities of life. 
Though people in the neighbourhood knew of her incarceration, they also knew that Colonel Maguire was a notorious duellist and had a short fuse. It was better to leave things as they were. 
There were regular dinner parties and balls, to which all, except the lady of the manor, were invited. 
According to Maria Edgeworth, who researched the events in some detail and whose novel Castle Rackrent (1800) has a chapter based loosely on Lady Cathcart's experiences, "it was his regular custom to send a servant with his compliments to Lady Cathcart informing her that the company had the honour to drink her ladyship's health, and begging to know whether there was anything at the table she would wish to have sent to her, the man regularly coming back with Lady Cathcart's compliments and thanks; she had everything she wanted, and she had the honour to drink the company's health."
Back in England, life went on much the same. 
Under instructions from Maguire, an agent was appointed to let the house and estate at Tewin, and a succession of gamekeepers were registered in the local court. 
Widowed three times, it was assumed that her ladyship had gone abroad to forget the past and start a new life.
