Why I moved to China
After graduating from Arizona State University (ASU), I continued to live near that large campus in Phoenix, Arizona. 
I'd become a Christian in college and my church would often host events to make foreign exchange students feel at home. 
Thousands of international students from all over the world attended ASU, and I enjoyed meeting such a wide variety of people. 
But I soon found that I liked the Chinese better than any other people group in the world. 
They tend to be humble, polite, intelligent, straightforward, and loyal friends.
I had five close friends who were Chinese in the 1980s, as well as, many acquaintances. 
In 1983, I heard about the opportunity to teach English in China. 
For two reasons I did not consider the possibility very seriously at that time. 
I hate travelling, and I hate learning foreign languages. 
Nevertheless, I took a trip to the Taiwan province in 1989.
It was the worst trip of my life. 
My best friend and I found that very few people spoke English (we had heard differently). 
Finding food we could eat without getting sick was even more difficult. 
The trip was only for 18 days, but all 14 of us got sick at least once. 
Most of us got sick several times.
After that miserable experience, I was convinced that I was not the type of person who should ever wander far from home. 
Not until February of 2002, did I even think about returning to China for a moment. 
At that time, I read the biography of Berlitz-- the guy who discovered the principle that the best way to teach a foreign language is to speak only in the language you are teaching.
It occurred to me that I could teach English in China without having to learn Chinese. 
The bad experience 13 years earlier was still fresh in my mind, but it did not keep me from considering another trip. 
For four months, I did not mention my thoughts to anyone. 
Then on June 28th of 2002 I was at the home of my friend Kristin. I told her that I was thinking about teaching English in China for one month in the summer of 2003.
Kristin told me to look at the website of an organization that sent people to China. 
When I got home that night, I looked at ESEC on the internet. 
My interest grew stronger, and I called them the next morning. 
When I told the girl what I had in mind for the following summer, she said, "Well, we need someone to teach for a whole year, but you'd have to leave in three weeks."
Instantly, I felt as though God put it on my heart that I should go. 
I've never felt anything like that before or since. 
I am a careful planner, and I rarely do anything spontaneously. 
Before her question, I never thought that I might go to China for more than just a short trip. 
But suddenly I felt perfectly peaceful about moving to China permanently.
I paused briefly, before I replied, "That sounds good, I think I want to do that. 
I can't say for certain, but let's set up a phone interview for Monday." 
I didn't need to think about it until Monday. 
I thought it over for about an hour, and decided to get rid of most of my belongings and move to China.
I had sold my condominium about a month before that eventful phone call. 
All I had to do was move up the closing date, which the buyer had already requested anyway. 
I had very little time to prepare for the big move. 
I gave away over $10,000 worth of my personal belongings. 
Someone had offered to buy my business earlier, but I could not contact them, so I simply closed it down.
On July 19th, I went to Los Angeles for five weeks of training, which proved to be extremely helpful. 
I met an 82 year old woman at training who had returned from her 13th year of teaching in China. 
After a brief talk with her, I made it my goal to teach in China until I am at least 84 years old. 
I was 42 when I spoke with her, and I hoped to spend the next 42 years teaching in China.
China is home now. 
When I arrived in Shanghai on August 28, 2002, my expectations were quite low. 
I thought the adjustment would be the toughest challenge of my life. 
But my life in China has been almost pure bliss. 
Of course, there have been minor difficulties, but my life in China is far superior to the life I left behind. 
There was nothing worth mentioning about adjusting to life in China. 
My friendships here are so rich that nothing else bothers me much.
In fact, the worst culture shock I have experienced was the reverse culture shock of my first summer visit to the states. 
Now I've learned that it is natural for me to feel somewhat out of place when I visit the states, so it does not bother me anymore.
