I Had a Stroke at 33
On New Year's Eve 2007, a clot blocked one half of my brain from the other. 
There was a cascade of input - triangles and sky and gravel sound and music on the radio and wind and the feeling of rough cloth near my hands. 
I could not make sense of it all; I did not know the small triangles were trees, the larger ones mountains, the sound tires crunching snow and Snow Patrol, the jacket Gore-Tex, and that my wrists were the things attached to things called my hands. 
They were colors and shapes and sound and touch and sensation and my brain was no longer sorting these things out. 
But when I saw the red snowblowers in the parking lot turned 90 degrees and doubled, I finally had a complete thought. I comprehended what I was seeing. 
Red snowblowers. Sideways. 
Strange.
That was what my stroke felt like: like I was separating from myself.
It was Dec. 31, 2006. I was 33. 
I did not yet know this, but a clot had traveled from my aorta into my brain, and made its way to my left thalamus. 
As a result, my left brain, the expert at numbers and language and logic and reasoning, a part of it suffocated and died. My right brain, the specialist with regard to color, music, creativity, intuition, and emotions, therefore could not talk to my left brain. 
Numbers became squiggles, colors lost their names, food lost flavor, music had no melody.
This is not normal; this is beautiful, I thought. But I am dizzy like I am on a boat. And my head hurts.
"I need to sit down," I managed to say. I had not yet lost my words. I was in the middle of a parking lot.
"I'll go inside, and you sit here," my then-husband said, telling me to sit on the curb outside the store. That he would be right back.
He disappeared and came out empty-handed because even he knew there was a problem. 
"Let's head back," he said. "There's no way I can buy filters while you're out here. 
Something's wrong." 
And eventually, my thoughts subsided. My brain went dark. Dark. 
I cannot remember that ride back to the house as much as I try, years later.
I was tired, so I napped. (Sleeping is not recommended immediately after or during a stroke.) 
I dreamed about getting lost in the snowy mountains. I dreamed about walking a frozen Alpine lake. I dreamed about losing my shoes. I dreamed about losing my voice.
When I woke up hours later, I really believed I had been in those mountains hiking - that it was not a dream. 
And I really had lost my voice. I had lost my words. I was unable to say, "I am trapped in my brain" or, "My memories are mixing with imagination."
Our friends had arrived to celebrate New Year's and all I could do was smile and say, "Hello." 
Just, "hello." 
They were excited to join us, and in the hubbub, I was silent. 
I am never silent. I also never nap.
"Hi, I'm having a brain drain," I said. I watched myself struggle. Underneath what felt like 100 down blankets, what was left of the pre-stroke self said, "That is not what I meant to say. Something is wrong." 
But no one, not even I, could hear or understand.
I tried to join my friends' conversation, but the words were too fast, the subject matter switching all the time. 
I opened my mouth to add something, but I couldn't form the words. 
We went out for fondue. 
I don't remember if I ate the fondue.
This was what I blogged that evening in an attempt to communicate what I was experiencing: 
I am feeling strange. My brain is in a weird state right now - a combination of short brain games and lack of memory. 
While taking on the concept of a brain game earlier today, I suffered a memory overhaul. 
Now I can't say what I want to say or remember what I want to remember. 
It's just a weird situation.
Just 17 hours earlier, pre-stroke, I'd written the following in my journal: 
So this is how it feels to hole up somewhere: the snow has come on and off this week, the chilly air outside has the snap of a crisp spring peapod, and all is peaceful. 
There is no external stimulation; my life has turned inward this week. 
Reading books.
When I checked my blog much later, there were comments from 12 of my friends urging me to go to the hospital. 
"Something is very wrong," they said. "We are worried." 
People have asked if anyone around me could tell I was having a stroke. 
"Weren't you acting weird?" they'd ask, and my husband's mouth would turn into a thin line, and my friends who joined us for New Year's would lower their eyes. 
I was acting weird, yes. But it was New Year's Eve. 
My friends and husband were drunk and jolly. I was not talking. They thought that was odd, but not cause for huge concern. They thought that perhaps I too was drunk.
Besides, I did not have the classic symptoms of a stroke. 
The Stroke Association uses the mnemonic device FAST: 
Face: Ask the person to smile. 
Does one side of the face droop? 
Mine did not.
Arms: Ask the person to raise both arms. 
Does one arm drift downward? 
Mine did not.
Speech: Ask the person to repeat a simple phrase. 
Is their speech slurred or strange? 
My speech was not slurred.
Time: If you observe any of these signs, call 911 immediately. 
I did not.
Two days after the stroke, we returned home to Berkeley
"I still don't feel well," I told my husband. "I'm staying home from work."
"OK."
Our fridge was empty. 
I went to Andronico's grocery store and browsed the aisles, a blur of colors and letters and shapes. 
What was it we needed? I wondered. 
I could not figure out how the pieces fit together, that I would need onions because we used onions for everything, that I would need bread for sandwiches, that I would need meat for a possible entree. 
They were shapes and colors and textures. 
That fleshy pink package was a fleshy pink rectangle. 
The countless numbers of canned soup and canned vegetables were mere metal cylinders.
I emerged with one thing: a jar of Muir Glen spaghetti sauce. 
I grabbed it because I had seen it before, because I could read the label. 
If it was something I could understand, it must be something I needed. 
I did not need spaghetti sauce.
I still do not remember how it is I paid, whether by cash or by debit or credit card. 
I do not remember swiping or handing over bills. 
I just remember blinking in the cold winter sun at my car in the parking lot. Holding a jar of spaghetti sauce.
And wondering how to get home. I did not know how to get home.
I got in the car and started driving. 
If I just drove, I thought, I would somehow get home.
Each time I thought about whether I needed to make a left turn or right or stop or go, I felt lost. I had no idea. 
And so I pressed on without thinking, while relying on intuition. 
Each time I stopped, I recognized landmarks - a tree or a house or a store. 
I knew I was getting closer to home, but I did not know how to continue.
Intuition carried me when logic and memory failed.
I made it home.
And then I thought, I need to get to a hospital.
I picked up the phone and then I asked myself, What is the phone number for 911?
I looked at the numeric keypad, and I could not figure out what number each shape represented. And what is the number for 911?
I thought perhaps I should try calling my husband. I could not remember his phone number, either. It did not occur to me to look for it in the contacts list on my BlackBerry, either.
I finally decided I would mash a bunch of numbers on the keypad and talk to whomever it was I dialed on the landline. 
I did not think about the fact that I did not know where I lived, but I punched in a set of numbers anyway.
"Hello," a man said.
"Hi!" I said.
"Hi," he said.
"Who is this?" I asked.
"This is A-," he replied.
"Oh! I have been trying to reach you! 
I forgot your phone number and I didn't know how to get ahold of you! 
I called this phone number, because it was in my fingers." 
"I'm coming right home," he said.
We went to the emergency room where they gave me a CT scan to get an idea of what was going on in my head.
There's a dark spot on the CT. "We think you have vasculitis," said the doctor. 
In my files, I later read the hospitalist's dictation: "Patient has focal low attenuating area in anterior left thalamus." 
In other words, there was a scar in my brain.
At the time I said, "OK." 
He continued, "We think it's vasculitis and we need to admit you for more tests." 
My husband joked, "We need Dr. House." 
I loved the MRI the next morning. 
It was peaceful inside the tube with the thumping noises. 
I closed my eyes and imagined a beach, ocean waves crashing, a distant horizon. 
I wondered what kind of imagery that would produce on the MRI - if they would see that I was thinking of water. 
I wondered if my brain would light up like a beach at sunset.
And then a neurologist came to me with the results. "Hi, Christine, we have discovered you've had a stroke."
"OK."
What did they think I had?
"Vasculitis." 
And what did I have?
"A left thalamic stroke." 
OK. 
But - what did they think I had?
The thalamus is the hub of the brain, its traffic circle. 
Each side of the thalamus is the size and shape of a walnut, or the same size, weight, and shape of a marine iguana's brain. 
It regulates sleep. It relays messages. 
Too much damage to the thalamus results in permanent coma.
I slept. And slept. And slept. I slept dreamless then, and dreamless for months. 
Or maybe I dreamt, but do not remember.
Awake I had a 15-minute short-term memory, like Dory the fish in Finding Nemo. 
My doctors instructed me to log happenings with timestamps in my Moleskine journal. 
That, they said, would be my working short-term memory. My memento to my mori.
I was the youngest person in the stroke unit by 40 years. 
The staff called me Forty-Seven - the last two digits of my room number. 
I only know this detail now because I re-read my journal, in which I recorded my entire experience, aphasia and all.
I wandered the halls of the hospital, wheeling my heart monitor and heparin on an IV pole. 
I lost track of time. I wandered outside the boundaries of telemetry. 
They lost my heartbeat. 
When I returned, they scolded me. 
"I won't do it again," I said, but then I forgot and wandered again.
At one point during my hospital stay, my friends visited. 
They greeted me by saying, "You look completely normal!" 
The neuropsychiatrist stepped in.
"Hello." 
"Hi."
"Do you know who I am?" 
"No, but it's nice to meet you." 
"Open up your journal." 
I did.
"What time is it now? 
What is the timestamp in the last entry?"
"It's 10:35. Oh! I met you 20 minutes ago! 
