Life Advice From My 99-Year-Old Grandpa -- Still the Coolest Guy I Know
The words "cool" and "grandpa" don't always go together, but I've been hearing them used to describe my grandfather, Harrison "Steve" Stephens, all my life.
He and Grandma have the coolest love story. 
In 1939, he was a cub reporter assigned to interview an unusual woman named Doris Landram -- the only female airplane pilot in Merced, California. 
Six weeks later, they were married!
When I was growing up, Grandpa was a newspaper editor by day, jazz guitarist by night. 
He was a WWII Navy veteran (and lifelong sailor) who always kept his hair buzzed after his service because the military haircut was just so easy (apparently he roared with laughter when, as a little kid, I described him as having "prickly hair and a ruined face").
My grandparents were married nearly 70 years, until Grandma died in 2009. 
Together they raised four kids in a house that by all accounts was full of laughter and music. 
Their mutual love and deep friendship was a fantastic model for our family.
Though he has told me many times that he misses G'ma every day, G'pa continues to live a full life. 
He hosts a jam session at his apartment each Tuesday with some of his musician pals. 
"It starts as Steve's salon and then after martinis it turns into Steve's saloon," as he says.
He writes a column for the Balboa Yacht Club newsletter ("A Dash of Salt"), mentored two foreign exchange students studying at Claremont Graduate University, and was the class of '38 correspondent for Stanford University's alumni magazine. 
He joked that he suspected they awarded him a Stanford Associates Award of Merit in 2008 "due to the mindset that thinks anybody over 85 who can complete a declarative sentence is a marvel," but accepted it with gratitude at a campus ceremony.
A few years ago when Grandpa took a spill off his bicycle and broke his hip, my friends said things like, "Oh no! But that's so cool that he's in his 90s and still riding a bike!" 
In truly inspiring fashion, he bounced back and simply started riding a souped-up tricycle.
