Delma Hughes: I grew up in a world without parents
Delma Hughes spent most of her childhood in care. 
She didn't realise she had a mother and father - she didn't even know her date of birth - but her big sister meant the world to her
I was 15 before I discovered that I actually had parents. 
Until that point I'd lived in a world where parents didn't exist - the care system. 
No one in care dwells on family; my sister Lucy and I didn't have one, and that was that. 
I didn't even know when my birthday was. 
I now know it's 25 September, but I didn't know it as a child. 
I never celebrated it. 
There wasn't a morning when I was woken up with presents or someone made me a cake.
I've never really known why my mum couldn't look after me. 
It wasn't drink, drugs, madness or any specific condition with a label. Perhaps she just couldn't function properly.
She had seven children in all and I am number three. 
I only met my eldest sister a couple of times as an adult and she seemed a fantastic person. I was in awe of her, but she died and so I never got to know her. 
She was taken in by our grandmother and grew up with her. 
I assume one was enough for my granny and so Lucy and I got scooped up by social services in 1961. 
The file says that we'd been left alone for days with no food in the house. 
I was 18 months and Lucy was three and a half.
Mum went on to have another four children, all of whom, bar the last, were taken into care, but I didn't know about them or my eldest sister until much later. 
To me, Lucy and I were alone in the world. 
She was everything to me.
Of course, we had a father but he never looked after us. 
I did go to his funeral - in 1978 the police knocked on my door and told me they had sad news. My dad had died. 
The trouble is, I didn't know how to react and actually felt bad for the officers who'd come around to break this monumental news.
Because of being shunted around in care for so long, my childhood is confusing. It's like a jigsaw with most of the pieces missing. 
At night for years I'd sit staring at pieces trying to solve the puzzle. Lucy has no memory either. 
Eventually I worked it out through my social services file when I was 30, although I had to threaten to sue North Wales social services to get it.
In all, I lived in about 20 places and if you don't have a conventional childhood, it's all a bit blank. 
You don't have photo albums, family holidays and funny stories that link up the years. 
On top of the haziness created by a fractured childhood, there is confusion created by the fact that we were drugged most of the time. 
When I showed my GP my file he couldn't believe the stuff I'd been prescribed as a child. 
I was always dosed up with tranquillisers and sleeping pills.
If I think really hard, I have vague memories from the nursery we were first taken to when the state became my corporate parent. 
But mostly I remember how I felt. 
The overwhelming sense of not being loved. 
I wasn't special to anyone. 
Lucy was special to me but I think as a younger, insecure sibling I was probably too much for her to cope with. 
I was shocked when I went to school and saw normal kids with mums waiting with snacks and cuddles at the school gate. 
I didn't know that happened. 
And I wanted it.
When I was five, Lucy was fostered out from the care home in North Wales where we lived. 
I stopped eating. 
In my notes it says that I was failing to thrive. 
I do remember feeling I couldn't survive without her - she was my whole world. 
She came back though, after three months, and then later that year we were both fostered together, but it didn't work out as the new family decided they didn't want me.
Lucy and I weren't glued together; we had different friends but I knew she was there and underneath was like me in a profound and inexplicable way.
The longest I stayed in one place was when Lucy and I were fostered for five years - but it wasn't a happy house and when I dared to speak out, my bags were packed and I was gone. 
No investigation. 
I was 12 and after that I didn't see Lucy. 
For some reason I thought this meant she had stopped liking me.
My memory kicks in properly when I was 15 and met my mother for the first time. 
A social worker came to the home I was living in and took me out. 
I thought maybe I was going to be moved again. 
We were near Llangollen in Wales and we turned up at a street of boarded-up and derelict houses. 
We went into a grotty house and sat at a table with a bucket of coal in the middle. 
The social worker pointed at a woman sitting at the table and said: "This is your mum." 
I thought, oh God. 
I couldn't look. I couldn't understand why they had done this to me. 
She could have been anyone. I knew of her existence but by then it was too late. 
I thought I should have been at least asked if I wanted to meet her.
I saw her a few times after that. 
Once she came to the home I was living in and offered to take me out for the day. 
At the home, we all wanted to escape, and on the rare occasion a parent surfaced they could take you out for a few hours. 
Even girls who'd been sexually abused by their dads were taken out by them. 
Some of them didn't mind having sex with their fathers because at least they escaped from the home.
I went out with my mother mainly because it was an opportunity to escape briefly. 
I felt fairly cold towards her. 
I don't think she had taken a driving test because she drove out straight across the lawn. 
She picked me up a couple of other times and took me to see my grandmother who told me things about my mother; she explained that she was not capable of looking after children. 
My grandmother died shortly after I met her, so I am glad I got the chance. 
After seeing Mum four or five times, I was moved and had no more contact with any of them.
Mum died five years ago. 
I didn't go to the funeral. 
I felt that it was the only bit of power I could retain. 
All my life, decisions had been made for me, but I was able to make this one and it felt good not to oblige her with my presence. 
In a way, her death signified a door closing on my past.
I have tried as an adult to reconnect with my sisters, but it's hard if you haven't any bonds from childhood. 
It made me wish we had spent time together growing up. 
I suddenly realised that although I couldn't change what had happened to me, perhaps I could do something for the 70,000 children who are now in care because, sadly, 86% of them are still separated from their brothers and sisters. We often have twins split up by the care system.
My experience of being split up not only from Lucy but also my other siblings led me to want to do something about it. 
After years of preparation, finally in 2008 I started the charity Siblings Together, which arranges holidays for siblings separated by care. 
Nothing is so heartwarming as to see them reconnect over a week's holiday - all my experiences seem to make sense because I know that my camps are repairing a bit of the damage.
I was not fortunate enough to have any kind of relationship with most of my siblings, but I am thrilled that others can. 
At every camp the kids go away with albums packed with photographs. 
I provide them all with cameras so they can capture their own memories.
I look back and see that the satisfaction I get now from doing what I do has come about as a result of a lonely and loveless start in life. 
I am fortunate enough to have two sons and cannot imagine ever putting them through what I have experienced. 
I don't wallow in self-pity. I'd rather help people be happier with their lot. Especially children who can't live with their families.
