Three months to find a wife
I'm an only child: I suspect my birth may have been a surprise in a marriage of convenience that had never planned to add me to the scene. 
In fact, I waited six years before appearing, and then I travelled hither and yon, often alone, in three nations: as a toddler on the mid-Atlantic islands of Ascension and St Vincent, to three schools in Brazil and one in Argentina, before coming to board in England at 16. 
I spoke Portuguese before English, and was cuddled more by my dark-skinned and much-loved Juvita than by my mother.
I tend to think now that my father had had no intention of marrying anybody, even that were he to arrive on Earth today he'd be a fastidious and agreeable gay man. 
That was, of course, unthinkable in his day, even to himself - a concept that would have horrified his prim and utterly upright soul. (Mother never commented on his somewhat odd late-life hobby of dressing little cut-out dolls.)
Marriage never occurred to him until he was 27, in 1925, when his company, hinting at promotion to Brazil, suggested that "if he had marriage in mind, there was no time like the present". 
They allowed him three months to get it done, before boarding a ship for Brazil, stopping in Madeira for a week to celebrate the wedding.
The company was Cable & Wireless, Western Telegraph. 
The son of a baker, he'd left school at 14 but had energy and drive. 
From being the last in the telegraph chain, the lad who took them to the door, he rose to being the first, one of those who tapped them out. 
The company urged him on to night-school, where he excelled at morse code and learned about electricity, but they couldn't have imagined the thoroughness with which he would search for a bride during those three months.
Until then, he had apparently given all his leisure time to golf, tennis and (sedate) motorcycling - even abroad and after marriage, a bike remained his favourite photographic subject. 
Now, for his hunt, he acquired a huge new Harley Davidson with sidecar - but restricted it to 30mph, not only to calm the candidates (if they knew they were such) but also from an attitude he maintained towards any vehicle all his life. 
He must have made a plan, because he always did. 
Simple. Take them to lunch. Concentrate. Then choose a wife. 
It didn't work like that.
His Voigtlander had rarely taken pictures of people, let alone of women, but suddenly, as if he'd bought a more enlightened camera, he realised the need to spot women. 
He buzzed around the south, from beach to countryside, but his albums offer only tantalising glimpses, for he never did bother with captions. 
