A Mistake
As far back as I can remember, my parents have bothered each other.
In India, we lived in two concrete rooms on the roof of a house. 
The bathroom stood separate from the living quarters. The sink was attached to one of the exterior walls. 
Each night, my father would stand before the sink, the sky above him full of stars, and brush his teeth until his gums bled. 
Then he would spit the blood into the sink and turn to my mother and say, "Death, Shuba, death. No matter what we do, we will all die."
"Yes, yes, beat drums," my mother said once. 
"Tell the newspapers, too. Make sure everyone knows this thing you have discovered." 
Like many people of her generation, those born before Independence, my mother viewed gloom as unpatriotic. 
To complain was to show that you were not willing to accept difficulties, that you were not willing to do the hard work that was needed to build the country.
My father was only two years older than my mother. 
Unlike her, he saw dishonesty and selfishness everywhere. 
Not only did he see these things but he believed that everybody else did, too, and that people were deliberately not acknowledging what they saw.
My mother's irritation at his spitting blood he interpreted as hypocrisy.
My father was an accountant. 
He had wanted to immigrate to the West ever since he was in his early twenties, ever since America liberalized its immigration policies in 1965. 
His wish rose out of self-loathing. 
Often when he walked down the street in Delhi, he would feel that the buildings he passed were indifferent to him, that he mattered so little to them that he might as well not have been born. 
Because he attributed this feeling to his circumstances-and not to the fact that he was the sort of person who sensed buildings' having opinions-he believed that if he were somewhere else, especially somewhere where he was paid in dollars and thus was rich, he would be a different person and one whose life had meaning.
Another reason he wanted to emigrate was that he saw the West as glamorous with the excitement of science. 
In India in the fifties, sixties, and seventies, radios, televisions, and cars were not just expensive objects but seen as almost supernatural. 
I remember that when we turned on the radio in our apartment, as the vacuum tubes warmed up, first the voices would sound far away and then they would rush at us, and this was thrilling, as if the machine were making some special effort for us.
Of everybody in my family, my father loved science the most. 
He tried to bring it into his life by going to medical clinics and having his urine tested. 
He loved clinics and doctors' offices. 
Of course, hypochondria had something to do with this; my father suspected that there was something wrong with him and that it might be something physical. 
Also, sitting in the clinics and talking to doctors in lab coats, he felt that he was close to important things, that what the doctors were doing was the same as what doctors would do in England or Germany or America, that he was already there in those foreign countries.
My mother had no interest in emigrating for herself. 
She was a high-school economics teacher, and she liked her job. 
But she thought that the West would provide me and my brother, Birju, with opportunities.
Then came the Emergency. 
Indira Gandhi suspended the Constitution and put thousands of politicians and journalists in jail. 
My parents, like almost everyone who had seen Independence come, were very loyal; they were the sort of people who looked up at a cloud and thought, That's an Indian cloud. 
After the Emergency, however, they began to think that even though they were ordinary and unlikely to get into political trouble, it might still be better to emigrate.
I used to assume that my father had been assigned to us by the government. This was because he appeared to serve no purpose. 
When he got home in the evening, all he did was sit in his chair in the living room, drink tea, and read the paper. Often he looked angry. 
By the time we left for America, when I was eight and Birju was twelve, I knew that the government had not assigned him to live with us. Still, I continued to think that he served no purpose.
My father, who had gone to America a year before us, was waiting for us in the arrivals hall at the airport. He was leaning against a metal railing and looking irritated. 
The sight of him made me anxious.
The apartment he had rented was in a tall, brown brick building in Queens. 
The gray metal front door swung open into a foyer with a wooden floor. 
Beyond this was a living room with a reddish-brown carpet that went from wall to wall. 
I had never seen a carpet, except in movies. Birju and my parents walked across the foyer and into the living room. 
I went to the carpet's edge and stopped. 
A brass strip held the carpet to the floor. 
I took a step forward, trying not to put my weight down. 
I felt as if I were stepping onto a painting.
My father took us to the bathroom to show us toilet paper and hot water. 
Whereas my mother was interested in status-in being better educated than others or being considered more respectable-my father was simply interested in having more things. 
I think this was because while both of my parents had grown up poor, my father's childhood had been more desperate. 
At some point, my father's father had begun to believe that thorns were growing out of his palms. He had taken a razor and picked at his hands until they were shaggy with scraps of skin. 
Because of my grandfather's problems, my father had grown up feeling that no matter what he did people would look down on him. 
As a result, he cared less about trying to convince people of his merits and more about just possessing things.
The bathroom was narrow. 
It had a tub, a sink, and a toilet in a row along one wall. 
My father reached between Birju and me and turned on the tap. 
Hot water came shaking and steaming into the basin. 
He stepped back and looked at us to gauge our reaction.
I had never seen hot water coming from a tap before. 
In India, in the winter, my mother used to get up early to heat pots of water on the stove so that we could bathe. 
Watching the hot water spill out, as if there were an endless supply, I had the sense of being in a fairy tale, one of those stories with a jug that is always full of milk or a bag of food that never empties.
That night, I went to bed on a mattress in the living room-the apartment had one bedroom, where my parents slept. 
Even in my sleep I was aware that I was in America. 
As the days passed, the wealth of this new country continued to astonish me. There were programs on television from morning until night. In our shiny brass mailbox in the lobby, we received ads on colored paper. The sliding glass doors of our apartment building would open when we approached. 
Each time they did this, I felt that we had been mistaken for somebody important.
My father, who had seemed pointless in India, had brought us to America and now we were rich. 
The fact that he had achieved this made him seem different, mysterious. 
All the time now he was saying things that revealed him as knowledgeable. 
In India, my mother had been the one who made all the decisions concerning Birju and me. 
Now I realized that my father, too, had opinions about us. 
This felt both surprising and intrusive, like being touched by a relative you don't know well.
My father took Birju and me to a library. 
I had been in two libraries before then. 
One, in a small noisy room next to a barbershop, had had newspapers but not books and had been used primarily by people searching the employment ads. 
The other had been on the second floor of a temple, and had had books, but they were kept locked in glass-fronted cabinets.
The library in Queens was bigger than either of the ones I had seen. 
It had several rooms, and thousands of books. 
The librarian said that we could check out as many as we wanted. 
I did not believe this at first.
My father told Birju and me that he would give us fifty cents for each book we read. 
This bribing struck me as un-Indian and wrong. 
My mother had told us that Americans were afraid to demand things from their children. 
She'd said that this was because American parents did not care about their children and were unwilling to do the hard work of disciplining them. 
If my father wanted us to read, what he should do was threaten to beat us. 
I wondered whether my father had become too American during the year that he had lived alone.
I wanted to check out ten picture books. 
My father said, "You think I am going to give you money for such small books?"
My mother, Birju, and I had taken everything we could from the airplane: red Air India blankets, pillows with paper pillowcases, headsets, sachets of ketchup, packets of salt and pepper, airsickness bags. 
Birju and I used the blankets until they frayed and tore. 
Around that time, we started going to school.
I had a shy nature. 
"You are a tiger at home," my mother said, "and a cat outside." 
At school, I sat at the very back of the class, in the row closest to the door. Often I could not understand what my teacher was saying. 
I had studied English in India, but either my teacher spoke too quickly and used words I did not know or else I was so afraid that her words sounded garbled to my ears.
It was strange to be among so many whites. 
They all looked alike. 
When a boy spoke to me between periods, it would take me a moment to realize that I had talked to him before.
The school was three stories tall, with hallways that looped on themselves and stairways connecting the floors like a giant game of snakes and ladders. 
Not only could I not tell white people apart but I often got lost trying to find my classroom. 
Soon I became so afraid of getting lost in the vastness of the school that I wouldn't leave the classroom when I had to use the toilet.
We had lunch in an asphalt yard surrounded by a high chain-link fence. Wheeled garbage cans were spread around the yard. 
I was often bullied. 
Sometimes a little boy would come up to me and tell me that I smelled bad. 
Then, if I said anything, a bigger boy would appear so suddenly that I couldn't tell where he had come from. 
He'd knock me down, then stand over me, fists clenched, and demand, "You want to fight? You want to fight?" 
Sometimes boys surrounded me and shoved me back and forth, keeping me upright as a kind of game.
Often, standing in a corner of the asphalt yard, I would think, There has been a mistake. 
I am good at cricket. I am good at marbles. 
I am not the sort of boy who is pushed around.
For me, the two best things about America were television and the library. 
Every Saturday night, I watched "The Love Boat." 
I looked at the women in their one-piece bathing suits and their high heels and imagined what it would be like when I was married. 
