Nepal: Earthquake 2015 - Office of the Resident Coordinator - Situation Report No. 5
Highlights
As of 28 April, the Government reports 4,358deaths and 8,174 injured people. 
Search and rescue teams have saved 14 people from the rubbles.
In addition to continued efforts in the KathmanduValley, the response continues to broaden to include more remote areas, including the most affected districts of Dhading and Gorkha.
Up to 90 per cent of the health facilities in Ramechapp, Nuwakot, Sindhupalchowk and Gorkha have been severely damaged.
Many people are leaving the Kathmandu Valley and joining families in less-affected areas.
There is anecdotal evidence of unrest in relation to limited water supplies. Uneven distributions pose a risk of generating animosity amongst the affected people.
Situation Overview
Four days have passed since the 7.8 magnitude earthquake struck the Central and Western Regions ofNepal. 
Aftershocks continue to affect the daily lives of people as they continue to sleep outdoors, in damp and cold conditions. 
The Government is encouraging people to return home, wherever possible.
Over the past 24 hours, the Government reported an increase in the number of deaths from 3,351 to4,358 people. 
At the same time, the number of injured has risen from 6,833 to 8,174 people (Source: NEOC - http://neoc.gov.np/en/). 
These numbers are expected to increase further as information from remote areas becomes available and more affected areas are searched and assessed.
As of today, international search and rescue (SAR) teams have rescued 14 people from the rubble. 
At the moment, in-country and committed SAR capacity is sufficient to cover all sites. 
No additional deployment is needed and all SAR teams which have not deployed yet are advised to stand down. 
In addition, theGovernment has requested that any Foreign Medical Team (FMT) that have not yet arrived to Kathmandu also to stand by.
Immediate needs include food, shelter, WASH, as well as medical tents, medication, surgical kits and body bags.
In the Kathmandu Valley, public life remains quiet. 
While small grocery shops are open, large businesses and some banks remain closed. 
While automatic banking machines are functional, replenishment is occurring at select areas at a slow pace.
With fuel reserves running low, cars and trucks are lining up at gas stations in town. 
All major roads are open for traffic. However, some side access roads remain blocked. 
Fuel is also needed to pump water from the ground and maintain services at hospitals and other critical facilities facing frequent power outages.
Mobile networks in Kathmandu remain functional. 
However, network outage and overloads remain common. 
Power throughout the city is limited with most households and offices mainly relying on generator power. 
As a result, many people are leaving Kathmandu Valley and returning to families inareas, which have not been affected by the earthquake.
Information on affected districts outside the Kathmandu Valley highlights the severity of the impact on communities. 
While district specific information continues to filter in, over 8 million people are estimated to be affected in 39 districts, of which over 2 million people live in the 11 most severely hit districts.
These figures are based solely on baseline data and models. These are indicative figures which can be used only for preliminary planning.
The Kathmandu International Airport is open 24 hours and serves as the main logistics hub. 
However,due to incoming goods and response teams, as well as departing people, including many foreigners, theAirport is congested. 
The Humanitarian Staging Area (HSA) is set up in the vicinity of the Airport to ease the flow of life-saving commodities. 
Two logistics hubs will be set up at and Pokhara and Birgunj to effectively manage the supply of relief items.
The focus of the response has shifted outside of Kathmandu to cover the most affected districts.
Meteorologists have predicted rainfalls for the coming ten days.
Humanitarian Response
Camp Coordination and Camp Management
Needs:
The Government identified 16 camps in Kathmandu Valley. 
Formal camp service delivery mechanisms and providers are still needed.
Response:
CCCM site profiling will start on 29 April with the 16 camps sites in Kathmandu Valley and later be expanded outward to affected districts.
All 16 camp sites have Government cluster nominated focal points. 
The Cluster is currently reaching out to the 30 CCCM trained government officials for management support.
Gaps &amp; Constraints:
Clarity is required to identify site/camp set up in Gorkha District where 80 per cent of the infrastructure has been affected.
Shelter, WASH and protection mechanisms in the 16 camps have not yet been established or are not functioning at optimum capacity due to the Urban Search and Rescue (USAR) phase.
Early Recovery
The Cluster focuses on debris management and emergency livelihood.
Education
Needs:
According to EMIS data, there are 3,353 schools in the severely affected districts, 2,903 schools in the most affected districts, and a further 9,762 in the partially affected districts. 
Affected children need to access safe places to play, receive psychosocial support and lifesaving messages. 
Initial reports from affected districts indicate that a huge proportion of school facilities have been totally destroyed or severely damaged due to the earthquake. 
Schools that are still standing are being used as shelters by displaced populations.
Response:
Procurement has started for tents and shelter materials for Child Friendly Spaces in coordination with theProtection Cluster. 
School in a Box, Early Childhood Development Kit (ECD) and Recreation Kits are also in the pipeline. 
The Education Cluster is working with the Protection Cluster to orient partners on key messages related to psychosocial support and lifesaving messages to convey to displaced children and communities. 
Partner agencies are deploying to Sindhupalchok, Bhaktapur, Kathmandu, Lalitpur, Gorkha and Nuwakot.
Gaps &amp; Constraints: 
The government will need significant support from partners to establish temporary learning spaces in the short and medium term to keep children safe.
Food Security
Needs:
The Food Security Cluster had a meeting with the Ministry of Agriculture Development (MoAD) on the 27thof April and the Government requested the cluster members to provide food security assistance to earthquake affected areas outside of the Kathmandu Valley. 
A total of 12 districts have been prioritized for the provision of food assistance. 
A formal letter of request has been sent in this regard. 
As per a preliminary assessment, around 20,000 MT of food is needed per month to support the affected people in12 affected districts. 
Data on needs will be available only after the completion of a rapid needs assessment.
Loss of livestock and a need for veterinary medicines and animal feeding have also been reported.
Response:
The cluster is dispatching rapid needs assessment teams to the prioritized 12 districts. 
Efforts to coordinate rapid assessments with other partners are under way. 
This includes market assessments as well.
Approximately 120 MT of food is currently available in the country. 
The cluster has dispatched food assistance to Gorkha and Dhading with existing in country food stocks and is also organizing air support(via two helicopters) to get food to the areas unreachable via road transport.
Around 30 MT of high energy biscuits and some fortified food (rice-soya blend) will be flown in from Dubai. 
Sindhupalchowk and Nuwakot remain the priority districts for the cluster.
Gaps &amp; Constraints: 
Since several agencies are fielding needs assessment teams, a need for better coordination is necessary to avoid overlap and misunderstanding.
Health
Needs:
The Ministry of Health and Population (MoHP) continues to assess the needs in the 11 worst affected identified districts and to manage and deploy the teams on the ground.
In terms of health infrastructure, preliminary information indicated that most of the health facilities (60 -90%) outside the district headquarters (DHQ) of Ramechapp, Nuwakot, Sindhupalchowk and Gorkha have been severely damaged and the hospitals in DHQ of Dolakha, Nuwakot are partially damaged.MoHP is making alternative arrangements (tents, camps) to provide medical treatment outside DHQ in the worst affected districts. 
Around the hospitals the water supply is fast deteriorating and sanitation conditions are becoming hazardous.
Response:
More than 20 Cluster partners are supporting the response by providing specialized personnel and medical supplies and body bags, water filters and purification materials, setting up and providing basic construction materials for field hospitals. 
Injured from Sindhupalchowk and Dhading were airlifted toDhulikhel hospital and field workers are being deployed to more remote affected areas.
Foreign Medical Teams have set up temporary hospital facilities in the affected areas (e.g. Pakistani Army is running the temporary hospital in Bhaktapur).
Gaps &amp; Constraints: 
Additional medical tents, surgical equipment and accessories and medicines for managing injuries are still needed. 
Post trauma and rehabilitation care for spinal cord injury patients; mobile toilets and messaging on post-earthquake disease outbreak are also required.
MoHP has appealed to foreign governments not to send additional medical teams. 
The Government ofNepal will assess the situation and advise if the situation evolves.
There is a need for transit camps and rehabilitation care particularly for those released from health facilities who are in need of post-treatment assistance and have no to care for them.
Better tracking of health interventions is required.
Logistics
Needs:
Limited helicopter capacity is available but additional support is required to transport relief goods.
There is a need to establish staging areas outside Kathmandu Valley to serve areas with no or limited road access.
Response:
The Humanitarian Staging Area is functioning well with 32 Mobile Storage Units available for humanitarian organisations. 
Six M18s are currently in the country, with support from foreign military assets, with a maximum capacity of two tonnes.
Pokhara Airport is functional and can be used for Hercules planes to strengthen relief supply chains. 
Two operational hubs will be set up at Nepalgunj and Birgunj to effectively manage the supply of relief items.
Due to incoming goods and response teams, as well as outgoing foreigners, the Tribhuvan International airport remains congested. 
The Cluster is working with local authorities to facilitate de-congestion,including taking advantage of DHL's support.
Gaps &amp; Constraints:
The Kathmandu International Airport can only handle planes with a maximum weight of 190 tonnes,limiting incoming relief supply. 
This is further compounded by continued blockages at the airport due to lack of landing and off-loading slots.
There are concerns regarding the limited availability of jet fuel at the airport.
Nutrition
Needs:
Nutrition assessment for all 21 most affected districts is still to be planned and initiated.
Response:
The Cluster has identified 3W information for 21 affected districts and assigned responsibilities for immediate assessment. 
An orientation on 29 April 2015 will support partners in carrying out a rapid nutrition assessment.
The nutrition cluster reviewed the prepositioning of items for nutrition response such as IEC for counseling and information dissemination, management of MAM and SAM as well as prevention and control of micro-nutrient deficiency disorders through Vit A, MNPs and IFAs.
Immediately following the rapid nutrition assessment, interventions will be done in all prioritized affected districts.
Gaps &amp; Constraints:
There is an identified need for supplementary feeding for children under 5 and for pregnant and lactating mothers, as well as treatment of severe acute malnutrition for children living in camp settings and inaffected districts.
Protection
Response:
A matrix for response by the cluster members will be available and a team of social workers will be mobilized and will start identification of separated children by 29 April. 
Cluster members have already started to collect information using the cluster check list.
Gaps &amp; Constraints:
Information on overall protection is limited. 
Information from affected districts is expected to be received shortly through Women and Children Offices in 33 districts.
Shelter
Needs:
The initial rapid assessments are being conducted at the district level. 
The Government of Nepal estimated that some 70,000 houses have been destroyed and another 530,000 damaged during the earthquake. 
Response:
Agencies have distributed 8.000 tarpaulins and 1.000 shelter kits in various affected districts. 
The distribution is set to increase in the coming days.
Gaps &amp; Constraints: 
There is a need to identify suitable shelter arrangements for people displaced and people whose houses are damaged or observed as insecure, including identifying short term and long term solutions.