Reports indicated that conditions in the political prison camps were harsh and that systematic and severe human rights abuses occurred throughout the prison and detention system. 
Detainees and prisoners consistently reported violence and torture. 
Press reported defector accounts of public executions in political prison camps. 
According to refugees, in some places of detention, prisoners received little or no food and were denied medical care. 
Sanitation was poor, and former labor camp inmates reported they had no changes of clothing during their incarceration and were rarely able to bathe or wash their clothing. 
An NGO reported that one reeducation center was so crowded that prisoners were forced to sleep on top of each other or sitting up. 
The same NGO reported that guards at a labor camp stole food brought for inmates by their family members. 
An NGO reported in January unsanitary conditions, crowding of inmates, and high death rates caused by epidemics in a reeducation center.
South Korean and international press reported that kyo-hwa-so, or reeducation centers, hold populations of up to 10,000 political prisoners, economic criminals, and ordinary criminals.
During the year the South Korean National Human Rights Commission reported that defectors indicated that North Korean authorities selected prison inmates to spy on others and to torture other prisoners. 
The commission also reported that attempts to escape led to execution by firing squad or hanging.
South Korean press reported an increase in the number of inmates at a labor camp under the Ministry of People's Armed Forces in North Hamkyung Province.
Estimates of the total number of prisoners and detained in the kwan-li-so political penal-labor camps range between 150,000-200,000. 
The Washington Post and Donga Ilbo estimated 154,000 prisoners. 
Information on the number of women and juvenile prisoners was not available. 
No additional information was available on whether men and women were held together or if conditions varied for women. 
One NGO reported that political prisoners sent to punishment facilities were subject to torture without consideration of their gender.
Under the Criminal Procedure Law, a criminal case is dismissed in case of a crime committed by a person under 14 years of age and under article 62 public education is applied in case of a crime committed by a person above 14 and under 17 years of age. 
One NGO reported in a survey of 20 defector youth that five reported experiencing torture while incarcerated between 1998 and 2003. 
There was no way to confirm whether changes to the criminal law in 2004 and 2005 resulted in less severe treatment for juveniles.
One NGO reported that women make up the majority of prisoners in ro-dong-dan-ryeon-dae, or labor-training centers; the majority of prisoners in these facilities were repatriated from China.
There was no information available on whether prisoners and detainees had reasonable access to visitors. 
In past years defectors reported that Christians were subjected to harsh punishments if their faith was made public. 
No information was available on whether prisoners or detainees could submit complaints to judicial authorities without censorship or request investigation of credible allegations of inhumane conditions. 
It is also not known whether results of investigations were made public. 
There was no information on whether the government investigated or monitored prison and detention conditions. 
Neither the UN Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation in the DPRK nor the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture have been allowed to independently assess conditions inside the country.
The government did not permit inspection of prisons or detention camps by human rights monitors. 
There was no information on whether ombudsmen can serve on behalf of prisoners and detainees to consider such matters as alternatives to incarceration for nonviolent offenders to alleviate inhumane overcrowding; addressing the status and circumstances of confinement of juvenile offenders; and improving pretrial detention, bail, and recordkeeping procedures to ensure prisoners do not serve beyond the maximum sentence for the charged offense.