e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution states that courts are independent and that judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict accordance with the law; however, an independent judiciary did not exist. 
The constitution mandates that the central court is accountable to the Supreme People's Assembly, and the criminal code subjects judges to criminal liability for handing down "unjust judgments." 
Witness to Transformation reported that only 13 percent of the 102 respondents who were incarcerated in the country received a trial.
Trial Procedures
The MPS dispensed with trials in political cases and referred prisoners to the SSD for punishment. 
Little information was available on formal criminal justice procedures and practices, and outside access to the legal system was limited to trials for traffic violations and other minor offenses.
The constitution contains elaborate procedural protections, providing that cases should be heard in public, except under circumstances stipulated by law. 
The constitution also states that the accused has the right to a defense, and when trials were held, the government reportedly assigned lawyers. 
Some reports noted a distinction between those accused of political, as opposed to nonpolitical, crimes and claimed that the government offered trials and lawyers only to the latter. 
There was no indication that independent, nongovernmental defense lawyers existed. 
According to a Washington Post report and the South Korean National Human Rights Commission report, most inmates at prison camps were sent there without a trial and without knowing the charges against them.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
While the total number of political prisoners and detainees remained unknown, a 2003 report by the U.S. Committee for Human Rights in North Korea, The Hidden Gulag, reported an estimated 150,000 to 200,000 persons were believed to be held in kwan-li-so political penal-labor camps. 
The Washington Post and Donga Ilbo estimated 154,000 political prisoners were being held in labor camps. 
The government considered critics of the regime to be political criminals. 
Political offenses reported during the year included burning old currency or criticizing the government's currency revaluation. 
Reports from past years described political offenses as including sitting on newspapers bearing Kim Il-sung's or Kim Jong-il's picture, mentioning Kim Il-sung's limited formal education, or defacing photographs of the Kims.
Civil Judicial Procedures and Remedies
According to article 69 of the constitution, "[c]itizens are entitled to submit complaints and petitions. 
The state shall fairly investigate and deal with complaints and petitions as fixed by law." 
Under the Law on Complaint and Petition, citizens are entitled to submit complaints to stop encroachment upon their rights and interests or seek compensation for the encroached rights and interests. 
Reports indicated this right was not respected in practice.
During the year the currency revaluation of November 2009 was reversed following reports of food shortages and public discontent and unrest. 
The November 2009 currency revaluation decreed that families could only trade 100,000 won (approximately $30), for new won. (Note: following the government currency revaluation in November 2009, the exchange rate has fluctuated. 
Approximations in this report are based on the rate as of December 2010.) No other property restitution was granted.