China - Peoples Republic of Agricultural Biotechnology Annual
China Considering Major Revisions to Biotechnology Regulations
Report Highlights:
China is one of the largest producers of biotech cotton in the world. It is also the world¡¯s largest importer of biotech crops, but it has not yet approved any major biotech food crops for cultivation.
The Chinese government is in the process of revising its biotechnology regulatory system and is reportedly preparing to push ahead with the commercialization of biotech corn. 
Several domestic companies are reportedly preparing to submit Bt corn events for approval for domestic cultivation; the approval process is expected to take 3-5 years. 
At the same time, delays in import approvals continue to worsen, causing unpredictability for traders and delaying the adoption of needed new varieties inexporting countries such as the United States. 
In May 2015, the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)released a draft revision to its regulations governing biotechnology that would remove timelines for approvals and add economic and social factors to the approval process for the first time.
Executive Summary:
The government of China is in the process of revising laws and regulations governing biotechnology. 
In May 2015, the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) released a draft amendment to the AdministrativeMeasures for Safety Assessment of Agricultural Genetically Modified Organisms for public comments,which was later notified to the WTO SPS Committee (SPS notification 881). 
The amendment would remove timelines for approvals and add economic and social factors to the approval process for the firsttime (see GAIN Report CH15021). 
MOA also recently reported that it is considering creating a procedure for soliciting public opinion on biotechnology applications to enhance public involvement in the agriculture biotech review decision making. 
Biotechnology is designated as a strategic emerging industry in China, and the government invests heavily in biotechnology research. 
In September 2014, the government released remarks by PresidentXi Jinping affirming official support for biotechnology research, but calling for a cautious approach to commercialization. 
He also said that foreign companies should not be allowed to ¡°dominate the agricultural biotechnology product market.¡± 
This is the first time remarks by President Xi on biotechnology have been made public. 
In February, 2015, the Chinese Communist Party pledged in its annual high level policy paper on agriculture to strengthen research, safety management, and public outreach on biotechnology (see GAIN Report CH15010).
According to recent news reports, several domestic companies are preparing to submit Bt corn events to MOA for approval for domestic cultivation. It is expected to take 3-5 years before these events are commercialized. 
China has not approved any foreign biotech food or feed crops for domestic commercial production. 
When foreign companies have asked to submit an application for domestic cultivation, MOA informed them that China¡¯s foreign direct investment restrictions prohibit them from doing so. 
There have been increasing reports of farmers in China planting unapproved insect resistant varieties of corn and rice to cope with rising pest pressures, but it is unclear how widespread this trend is.
MOA approved two new soybean and one corn variety for import in December 2014 (see Appendix II).
These were the first new approvals since June 2013. 
The increasingly slow and unpredictable approval process resulted in large-scale trade disruptions. 
Corn trade remains weak after the approval of the corn event MIR 162, while DDGS trade witnessed a recovery. Trade in other products, such as alfalfa, have also suffered from biotech related trade disruptions. 
Despite these challenges, China is expected to remain a significant importer of biotech products, notably soybeans. 
The United States, as well as many other countries, has continued to press China to adhere to a science-based policy on biotechnology approvals.
Government Policy
Biotechnology is designated as a strategic emerging industry in China, and the government invests heavily in biotechnology research. 
While the total amount of Chinese government expenditures on biotechnology is unknown, it is believed to far exceed public sector investment in biotechnology in any other country, including the United States (see the GAIN Report 13033 for additional details).
In February 2015, the Chinese Communist Party pledged in the 2015 No. 1 Document to strengthen research, safety management and public education on biotechnology (see GAIN Report CH15010).
(The No. 1 Document gets its name from being the first policy document issued by the ChineseCommunist Party each year; it is reserved for important issues, such as agriculture.) The document built on the comments President Xi Jinping made on biotechnology during a major policy speech on agriculture in December 2013 (see below).
The No. 1 Document and speech help partially explain what had appeared from the outside to be a confusing and somewhat contradictory set of government actions on biotechnology: slowing or stalled approvals for non-Chinese developed traits, stalled commercialization of domestically developed biotech corn and rice, and strong support for biotechnology research and seed companies. 
Sources suggest that these policies may be aimed at limiting foreign competition while China¡¯s domestic biotechnology industry develops.
There are increasing reports that the unwritten policy against approving major GE food crops will soon come to an end. 
In summer 2015, two leading Chinese seed companies, Da Bei Nong and Origin,revealed that they have finished production trials for their Bt corn varieties, and are now ready to submit applications to MOA for biosafety certificates. 
The approval process for cultivation is expected to take three to five years, although they could be expedited. 
There have been increasing reports of farmers inChina planting unapproved Bt varieties of corn and rice to cope with rising pest pressures, but it is still unclear how widespread this trend is.
Domestically developed varieties of biotech rice and corn received biosafety certificates in 2009 and these were renewed in December 2014. 
None of these varieties were granted variety registration, the last step needed for commercialization. 
To date, China has not approved any foreign biotech food or feed crops for domestic commercial production.
The approval for cultivation of GE corn would be a major breakthrough for China¡¯s biotechnology industry. 
The lack of a clear path to commercialize for major biotechnology crop varieties (other than cotton) has limited incentives for local seed companies to invest in biotechnology. 
It has also encouraged public labs to focus on basic research rather than developing commercially viable seeds.Inconsistent protection of intellectual property and the fragmented nature of China¡¯s seed industry further discourage private sector investment in biotechnology. 
The government is working on developing a new seed law to try to improve variety protection (see GAIN report CH14035).
The Chinese government¡¯s decision to restrict participation of foreign seed technology companies, ban foreign investment, and slow approvals for many biotechnology crops has slowed the development of the biotechnology sector in China. 
In 2011, foreign investment in biotechnology was moved from the¡°restricted¡± to the ¡°banned¡± category, meaning that foreign companies could no longer conduct agricultural biotechnology research in China. 
Some Chinese government officials have expressed concern that international seed companies would dominate the seed market in China if they were allowed to commercialize their biotechnology seeds. 
The example of cotton, where international companies were allowed to commercialize seeds, suggests these fears may be misplaced. 
While biotech cotton seeds from international companies initially held large share of the market, locally developed varieties quickly arose and now dominate the market for biotech cotton seeds in China.
Government officials cite lack of public acceptance as an important factor behind the slow pace of biotechnology commercialization in China. 
Public opinion is one factor that is considered when deciding whether to approve a genetically engineered (GE) crop for import or cultivation, along with safety, environmental, and economic considerations. 
A lack of public acceptance was directly cited by MOA in July 2014 as the sole reason for delaying an import approval application for a GE soybean variety.
The government is increasing its public outreach efforts to address public misperceptions to help develop China¡¯s domestic biotechnology industry. 
Soon after President Xi¡¯s speech was published inSeptember 2014, MOA launched a campaign to train and educate local agricultural officials and the public about biotechnology. 
Both traditional and social media are being used to explain China¡¯s biosafety regulatory work. 
MOA plans outreach to provincial agricultural officials, students, and the general public. Provincial authorities are being asked to assist in these efforts.
Many people in China still have limited knowledge about biotechnology, and rumors and misinformation is widespread. 
A common and persistent misperception is that consumers inbiotechnology producing countries, such as the United States, do not themselves consume genetically modified food. (In reality over 90 percent of corn and soybeans in the United States come from GEvarieties and are used in many food products.) 
The emerging media, such as the MicroBlog, WeChat,and on-line forums are often used by opponents of agricultural biotechnology.
Public opponents of biotechnology have become more vocal and active in challenging the government.There have been a number of requests for MOA to disclose information, including questions from members of the National People¡¯s Congress Consultative Committee. 
A Chinese lawyer filed a case against MOA claiming that MOA violated the public information disclosure requirements after his request for information was rejected. 
The lawyer requested disclosure of information related to agriculture biotech imports, safety review results and reports for three soybean events imported for food and feed use, reasons for rejecting commercialization of GE crops for staple foods, whether China plans to commercialize GE crops for staple foods, measures to protect domestic agriculture and farmers¡¯interests, as well as implementation of the GMO labeling regulations and punitive measures. 
MOA responded that the approved events, the labelling requirements and the safety review documents have been disclosed on MOA¡¯s official website and that the other issues do not fall within the government information disclosure scope. 
In July 2015, the Beijing High Court made the final ruling in favor of MOA. 
Production
China is the sixth largest producer of agricultural biotechnology crops in the world by area according to a 2014 report by the International Service for the Acquisition of Agro-biotech Applications (ISAAA).Cotton accounts for almost all of the 4 million acres of biotech crops grown in China. 
Although China has commercialized six genetically modified plants since 1997 (cotton, tomato, sweet pepper, petunia, poplar, and papaya), few are in production today due to difficulties in bringing the products to commercialization.
In 2014, 7.1 million Chinese farmers planted 3.9 million hectares of biotech cotton. 
While cotton acreage decreased from 4.6 million hectares in 2013 to 4.2 million hectares in 2014, the percentage of cotton acreage planted with GE seeds increased by three percentage points to 93 percent.Approximately 8,500 hectares of virus resistant papaya were planted in Guangdong, Hainan Island, and,beginning this year, in Guangxi. 
Virus resistant papaya acreage increased by 50 percent from 5,800hectares in 2013 to 8,475 hectares in 2014. 
There have been reports of farmers in China planting unapproved varieties of Bt corn and rice to cope with rising pest pressures, but it is unclear how widespread this trend is.
Biotech products approved for commercial production in China can be found on MOA¡¯s website. 
In general, biotech crop cultivation is approved on a province by province basis. 
However, the vast majority of the safety certificates for cultivation are for domestically developed varieties of Bt cotton which are approved for three ecological areas. 
The government has not approved any foreign developed biotech food or feed crops for cultivation. 
China does not have a co-existence policy.
Despite years of public research, China has not yet commercialized any genetically modified grains or oil seeds. 
In 2009, MOA granted the first biosafety certificates for food and feed crops to two Chinese developed insect-resistant rice varieties and one high phytase corn variety (which were renewed at the end of 2014). 
However, MOA did not issue final approval for planting. 
MOA does not publish information on ongoing domestic biotech research and development. According to MOA publication son deregulation, major crops undergoing field trials (either the intermediary experiment or environmental release stage) include insect resistant corn, high lysine corn, insect resistant soybeans,and wheat that is less prone to pre-harvest sprouting. 