South Africa's provinces
South Africa has nine provinces, each with its own legislature, premier and executive councils. The provinces, with their own distinctive landscapes, vegetation and climate, are:
Eastern Cape
Free State
Gauteng
KwaZulu-Natal
Limpopo
Mpumalanga
Northern Cape
North West
Western Cape
Eastern Cape
AgricultureㄩAgriculture is important in the Eastern Cape.
The Alexandria-Grahamstown area produces pineapples, chicory and dairy products, while coffee and tea are cultivated at Magwa. 
People in the former Transkei region are dependent on cattle, maize and sorghum farming. 
An olive nursery has been developed in collaboration with the University of Fort Hare to form a nucleus of olive production in the Eastern Cape.
ForestryㄩThere is excellent potential for forestry 每 the coastal areas receive good summer rainfall and have a moderate climate, becoming more subtropical to the north-west. 
The Tsitsikamma National Park on the southern border is home to dense indigenous forests.
IndustryㄩWith two harbours and four airports offering direct flights to the main centres and an excellent road and rail infrastructure, the province has been earmarked as a key area for growth and economic development.
The Provincial Industrial Development Strategy identified the sectors that can create jobs and diversify the economy. These are aligned with the sectors that are being prioritised by government and include the following:
automotive and components sector, in which the province has had significant new investments in recent years
renewables and the green industries
agriculture and agroprocessing
forestry and timber processing
pharmaceuticals
plastics and petrochemicals
capital goods
tourism.
The East London Industrial Development Zone (IDZ) has attracted new investments, which will provide approximately 600 direct and more than 1 000 indirect jobs. 
The Coega IDZ has also secured, among other things, the Cape Concentrates Tomato Paste Project, which will create 180 direct jobs and 3 000 jobs on farms.
New investments have also been made in the auto and components sector. 
Daimler AG has awarded sole rights to Daimler Benz to produce the new C-Class model, the W205. 
The investment of R2 billion will result in the creation of 2 000 jobs during the training and preparation phase.
During 2011, government and state-owned enterprises supported key strategic projects in the province, which included the Umthombo PetroSA Project in the Coega IDZ, Emalahleni Coal in Lady Frere, Langa Solar PV Park in Berlin, East London, and the Gehrlicher-Ikhwezi Pilot PV Park in the East London IDZ.
Unemployment started to decrease from 30% in 2009 to 27.2% at the end of 2010. 
Critical interventions that enabled this decrease include the Expanded Public Works Programme through which 72 339 job opportunities were created by 2011, far above the target of 68 591 jobs. 
Of these, 28 089 jobs benefited young people, while 28 336 women and 424 people with disabilities benefited.
This was a total of over 180 000 jobs between 2009 and 2010 against the target of 132 786, with the infrastructure and "non-state" being the top two performing sectors.
Free State
The Free State, a province of wide horizons and blue skies, farmland, mountains, goldfields and widely dispersed towns, lies in the heart of South Africa, with Lesotho nestling in the hollow of its bean-like shape. 
Between the Vaal River in the north and the Orange River in the south, this immense rolling prairie stretches as far as the eye can see.
In May 2011, Manguang, comprising Bloemfontein, Botshabelo and Thaba Nchu, became South Africa's newest metropolitan authority. It has an established institutional, educational and administrative infrastructure, and houses the Supreme Court of Appeal.
Important towns include Welkom, the heart of the goldfields and one of the few completely preplanned cities in the world; Odendaalsrus, another gold-mining town; Sasolburg, which owes its existence to the petrol-from-coal installation established there; Kroonstad, an important agricultural, administrative and educational centre; Parys, on the banks of the Vaal River; Phuthaditjhaba, well known for the beautiful handcrafted items produced by the local people; and Bethlehem, gateway to the Eastern Highlands of the Free State.
The N1, which is the artery between Gauteng and the Western and Eastern Cape, passes through the middle of the Free State.
Mining: Mining is the Free State's major employer. 
A gold reef over 400 km long stretches across Gauteng and the Free State. 
South Africa is the world's largest gold producer, and the country's largest gold-mining complex is Free State Consolidated Goldfields, with an area of 330 km2.
The province has 12 gold mines, producing 30% of South Africa's output and making it the fifth-largest producer of gold in the world. 
Gold mines in the Free State also supply a substantial portion of the total silver produced in the country.
Uranium occurring in the gold-bearing conglomerates of the goldfields is extracted as a by-product.
Bituminous coal is mined and converted to petrochemicals at Sasolburg.
The Free State also produces high-quality diamonds from its kimberlite pipes and fissures, and the country's largest deposit of bentonite is found in the Koppies district.
Manufacturing and industry: The most important manufacturing subsectors, besides chemicals, are food and beverages, textiles, furniture, agriprocessing, jewellery and engineering products.
Nearly 20% of the province's manufacturing sites are devoted to food and beverages.
In 2011, the Provincial Government announced the establishment of three manufacturing facilities designed to create jobs: 
a tyre-recycling plant in Sasolburg
a potato-chip plant in Industriqwa in QwaQwa
a Kraft paper plant in Frankfort.
In 2011, the Free State Development Corporation was active in attracting new investments and signed a memorandum of understanding with the South Africa-Netherlands Chamber of Commerce with the aim of increasing bilateral trade.
Gauteng
Mining and manufacturing: Manufacturing includes basic iron and steel, fabricated and metal products, food, machinery, electrical machinery, appliances and electrical supplies, vehicle parts and accessories, and chemical products.
The major gold and diamond mining houses all have their headquarters in Johannesburg, the biggest being Anglo American and De Beers.
There are 159 mines 每 44 of them gold mines 每 in Gauteng, that together account for a quarter of South Africa's total mineral production. 
Most of the mining is for gold 每 80% of Gauteng's output.
Although gold mining and ancillary industries provide thousands of jobs, the importance of mining is declining compared to the manufacturing and financial sectors. 
Mining produces only 6% of Gauteng's total income and 31% of export earnings.
Technology: More than 60% of South Africa's research and development takes place in Gauteng.
The Innovation Hub in Pretoria is Africa＊s first internationally accredited science park and a full member of the International Association of Science Parks. 
Its community has become a regional centre of innovation and knowledge creation, linked to the fast moving world of global interconnectivity. 
It is made up of small. medium and micro enterprises and multinational companies, employing in excess of 1 000 people.
Linked to the building of the broadband network infrastructure is a multifaceted information and communications technology (ICT) strategy that the Department of Communications plans to roll out. Key to the strategy is the establishment of a "Gauteng Silicon" to be modelled on Silicon Valley in the United States of America. 
The Gauteng Silicon will be attached to the Innovation Hub and will drive a structured programme of information technology business incubation; start-up business support; and ICT skills training with a focus on software development, design, and innovation in ICT.
Agriculture and industry: A large area of the province falls within the so-called ※Maize Triangle§. 
Gauteng is an integrated industrial complex with major areas of economic activity in three sub-regional areas, namely the Vaal Triangle; the East, West and Central Rand; and Pretoria.
Over the next three years, the Gauteng Provincial Government plans to spend R34 billion on infrastructure development to boost the province's industrial activity.
KwaZulu-Natal
KwaZulu-Natal is one of the country＊s most popular holiday destinations. This verdant region includes South Africa＊s lush subtropical east coast. Washed by the warm Indian Ocean, it stretches from Port Edward in the south, and northwards to the Mozambique boundary.
Limpopo
Limpopo, South Africa's northernmost province, borders onto Mozambique, Zimbabwe and Botswana, making it the ideal gateway to Africa. 
Named after the Limpopo River that flows along its northern border, the province is rich in wildlife, spectacular scenery and a wealth of historical and cultural treasures.
Agriculture
In terms of agriculture, Limpopo could be described as the garden of South Africa, or even that of the whole continent, given its rich fruit and vegetable production.
It produces 75% of the country's mangoes; 65% of its papayas; 36% of its tea; 25% of its citrus, bananas, and litchis; 60% of its avocados; two thirds of its tomatoes; and 285 000 tons of potatoes. Other products include coffee, nuts, guavas, sisal, cotton and tobacco.
Over 170 plantations produce timber. 
In addition, cotton, sunflower, maize, wheat cultivation and grapes are produced.
Most of the higher-lying areas are devoted to cattle and game ranching, earning a reputation for quality biltong (salted, dried meat), which is a popular South African delicacy.
Industry and mining
Limpopo also has abundant mineral resources, making mining the critical sector of the province's economy by contributing 22% of the gross geographic product.
The platinum group metals include platinum, chromium, nickel, cobalt, vanadium, tin, limestone and uranium clay. 
Other reserves include antinomy, phosphates, fluorspar, gold, diamonds, copper, emeralds, scheelites, magnetite, vermiculite, silicon, mica, black granite, corundum, feldspar and salt.
Mpumalanga 
Mpumalanga means ※Place where the Sun Rises§and people are drawn to the province by its magnificent scenery, fauna and flora, and the fascinating remnants of the 1870 gold-rush era.
Northern Cape
The Northern Cape is the largest province in South Africa. It is slightly bigger than the surface area of Germany 每 taking up almost a third of the country's total land area.
The Northern Cape lies to the south of its most important asset, the mighty Orange River, which provides the basis for a healthy agricultural industry.
The Northern Cape is bounded by the Atlantic Ocean in the west, and Namibia and Botswana to the north-west and north respectively. It is fringed by the Swartberg mountain range on its southern border with the Western Cape in the Calvinia district.
Its major airports are situated at Kimberley and Upington, and the province has an excellent road network, which makes its interior easily accessible from South Africa's major cities, harbours and airports.
Sutherland is host to the southern hemisphere＊s largest astronomical observatory, the multinational-sponsored Southern African Large Telescope.
The Northern Cape is one of two sites to host the Square Kilometre Array (SKA), a giant next-generation radio telescope being developed by scientists from 17 countries.
The largest part of the province falls within the Nama-Karoo Biome. The area is known worldwide for its spectacular annual explosion of spring flowers, which attract thousands of tourists. 
This biome contains a number of fascinating plants, including the elephant's trunk ("halfmens" or half-man), tree aloe ("kokerboom" or quiver tree) and a variety of succulents.
North West
North West lies in the north of South Africa, on the Botswana border, fringed by the Kalahari desert in the west, Gauteng to the east, and the Free State to the south.
Mining
Mining contributes 23.3% to the North West's economy, and makes up 22.5% of the South African mining industry as a whole.
Western Cape
Capital: Cape Town
Principal languages: Afrikaans (49.7%), isiXhosa (24.7%), English (20.2%)
Population: 5 822 734 (Census 2011) 
Share of the total population: 11.3%
Area (km2): 129 462
% of total area: 10.6%
The Western Cape＊s natural beauty, complemented by its hospitality, cultural diversity, excellent wine and colourful cuisine, make the province one of the world＊s greatest tourist attractions.
Agriculture and marine fisheries
Agriculture brings in 40% of all export revenue and employs 200 000 people in the Western Cape.
A local environmental and new-energy technology fund, Inspired Evolution, invested R52,5 million in a Western Cape-based abalone farm, Abagold. 
The Hermanus farm is the country's largest exporter and international competitor in the hatching, rearing, processing and exporting of local abalone.