Supplier Responsibility 2009 Progress Report
Apple and Supplier Responsibility
Apple is committed to ensuring the highest standards of social responsibility throughout our supply chain. 
The companies we do business with must provide safe working conditions, treat employees with dignity and respect, and use environmentally responsible manufacturing processes wherever Apple products are made.
For the past several years, Apple has required suppliers to commit to a comprehensiveSupplier Code of Conduct as a condition of their contracts with us. 
We drive compliance to the Code through an aggressive monitoring program, including factory audits,corrective action plans, and verification measures.
Apple¡¯s approach to supplier responsibility extends beyond compliance monitoring.We also provide detailed standards and ongoing training support to help suppliers continue to meet our expectations. And by making social responsibility part of the way we do business, we ensure that suppliers take our standards as seriously as we do.
Setting Clear Expectations
The Apple Supplier Code of Conduct outlines a comprehensive set of expectations covering labor, human rights, the environment, health and safety, ethics, and management systems. 
Every Apple supplier contract includes a commitment to comply with the Code.
Our Supplier Code of Conduct draws on internationally recognized standards. 
While similar to the Electronics Industry Citizenship Coalition (EICC) Code of Conduct, it is more stringent in several important areas. 
For example, Apple¡¯s Code includes concepts from the International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions regarding the rights of workers to freely associate and bargain collectively. 
Our Code also prohibits discrimination based on pregnancy test results.
As in previous years, we¡¯ve continued to strengthen the Apple Supplier Code ofConduct based on our audit experience and input from stakeholders. 
Our recent updates make the Code even more protective of the workers in our supply chain and further clarify our expectations.
To download the Apple Supplier Code of Conduct, visit www.apple.com/supplierresponsibility.
2008 Program Highlights
In 2008, we extended and enhanced our supplier responsibility programs.
We more than doubled the number of facilities audited for compliance with our Code,completing onsite audits of 83 facilities in 2008, compared with 39 facilities in 2007.
We implemented more rigorous investigation methods and enhanced our remediation procedure for core violations. 
In addition, we instituted a more thorough procedure for verifying corrective actions resulting from an audit.
We developed an industry-leading position on recruitment practices in response to an audit discovery involving immigrating workers. 
We learned that some of our suppliers had hired contract workers from one country to work in factories in another  that some of those workers had paid recruitment fees in excess of applicable legal limits. 
In addition to demanding reimbursement, we updated our Code to require that suppliers take responsibility for the entire recruitment process, including the recruitment practices and fees of labor agencies in the workers¡¯ home countries.
We expanded our efforts with our suppliers to train workers on their rights and to train management and supervisors on their social responsibility obligations. 
In partnership with our suppliers, more than 27,000 people were trained in 2008, up from2200 people in 2007.
In 2008, we trained more than 400 Apple employees, empowering them to monitor compliance to our Code whenever they visit supplier facilities.
We launched an education and development pilot at one of our supplier¡¯s factories to help workers fulfill their educational aspirations while continuing their employment.
This report provides more information about specific findings and corrective actions from our 2008 audits, as well as a description of program enhancements designed to drive further improvements.
Monitoring Compliance
The Audit Process
Our compliance program begins with a risk assessment that considers the location of the factory, the level of business involvement with Apple, and past audit performance¡ªincluding corrective action closure and management¡¯s commitment to improvement.
When Apple audits a supplier, our employees take the lead¡ªwith the support of in-region staff and third-party experts who know the language and understand local regulations and practices. 
Each of the auditors on the team is trained to use our detailed protocol and to assess every item across all 17 categories in our Code. 
Even if no violation is found, we evaluate the management system for each element of ourCode and identify areas for improvement.
Apple procurement managers help coordinate the audit, while serving as an escalation point for any issues that arise during the audit and corrective action process. 
This direct involvement makes it clear to our suppliers that social responsibility is integral to their business relationship with Apple.
The audit includes:
Confidential interviews with randomly selected employees from the line, representing multiple shifts and both direct and contract workers
Interviews with senior management in all major functional areas
Physical inspections of manufacturing facilities and, as appropriate, living and dining areas
Review of records and relevant policies and procedures
The Corrective Action Process
At the conclusion of the audit, the audit team reviews the findings with the facility management, and the factory¡¯s most senior manager provides written acknowledgement of the preliminary audit findings.
When improvements are needed, Apple requires the supplier to produce a corrective action plan that addresses not only the specific violation, but also the underlying management system needed to prevent reoccurrence. 
We track completion of each corrective action to closure, with an expectation that all violations will be corrected as quickly as possible, but not later than 90 days after the audit.
To confirm that corrective actions have been closed to Apple¡¯s satisfaction, our team performs a Corrective Action Verification audit. 
If we find issues that have been inadequately addressed, we continue to work with the supplier on additional improvement measures. 
However, where violations are numerous or severe and corrective actions are inadequate, we terminate the business relationship.
Audit Results
In 2008, we continued to expand the scope of our compliance program. 
We completed onsite audits at 83 facilities, including 10 repeat audits and 73 first-time audits selected through a risk management process. 
Our return visits revealed continued performance improvements and better working conditions, with overall compliance increasing at every facility. 
First-time audits revealed patterns of compliance and noncompliance similar to our first-time audits in 2007.
Our most significant discovery involved recruitment practices in which our suppliers had hired workers from one country to work in factories in another country. Of the 83 facilities audited, we found six facilities where these contract workers stated they had paid recruitment fees that exceeded the applicable legal limits¡ªoften requiring them or their families to incur a debt. 
We classified this overcharge as a core violation,our most serious category of violation, since these workers may not feel at liberty to leave employment until the debt is paid.
Other core violations included one case of coaching workers interviewed in the audit process, seven cases of underage workers, and three cases of falsified records.