The world economy and trade in 2014 and early 2015
World trade growth remained modest in the opening months of 2015 following three years of weak expansion. 
Annual increases in merchandise trade in volume terms were very small in that period, measuring just 2.5 per cent in 2014, 2.5 per cent in 2013, and 2.2 per cent in 2012. 
The exports of developing and emerging economies grew faster than those of developed countries in 2014, 3.1 per cent in the former and 2.0 per cent per cent in the latter. 
Meanwhile, imports of developing countries grew more slowly than those of developed economies, 1.8 per cent compared to 2.9 per cent.
Seasonally adjusted quarterly trade volume indices for the first quarter of 2015 showed import demand accelerating indeveloped economies but slowing in developing countries.
Introduction
The modest 2.5 per cent rise in world merchandise trade volume in 2014 was again roughly equal to the 2.5 per cent increase in world GDP for the year (seeFigure 1). 
It also marked the third consecutive year in which world trade volume grew less than 3 per cent.
Trade growth averaged just 2.4 per cent between 2012 and 2014, the slowest rate on record for a three-year period when trade was expanding (excluding years like1975 and 2009 when world trade actually declined).
Several factors contributed to the sluggishness of trade and output in 2014 and in the first half of 2015, including slowing GDP growth in emerging economies, an uneven economic recovery in developed countries, and rising geopolitical tensions, among others.
Strong exchange rate fluctuations, including an appreciation of roughly 15 per cent in the US dollar against a broad basket of currencies since the start of 2014, further complicated the trade situation and outlook.
Collapsing world oil prices in 2014 (down 47 per cent between 15 July and 31 December) and weakness in other commodity classes hit export receipts and reduced import demand in exporting countries, but also boosted real incomes and imports in importing countries. 
Whether this development would turn out to be positive or negative on balance for world trade in 2015 was still unclear at the end of the second quarter. 
The 3.5 per cent year-on-year increase in the first quarter suggested that trade growth for the year would be slightly stronger than in 2014 (although still below average), but prospects for the second half of the year were clouded by several risk factors including theGreek sovereign debt crisis, slowing economic growth in emerging economies, and the possibility of rising interest rates in the United States.
The 2.5 per cent growth rate for world trade in 2014 refers to the average of merchandise exports and imports involume terms, i.e. adjusted to account for differences ininflation and exchange rates across countries. 
The pace of trade expansion last year ended up being well below analysts' predictions at the start of the year. 
A number off actors contributed to the initial overestimates, most of which could not have been anticipated.
The sharp declines in commodity prices since July2014 were not foreseen and did not figure in early economic forecasts. 
The oil price drop was driven by surging production in North America, although falling demand in emerging markets also played a part.
At the start of 2014, most economic forecasters were predicting above-trend GDP growth in the UnitedStates and near-trend growth in the euro area. Both predictions promised to support increasing trade but neither materialized, as a mix of strong and weak quarterly GDP results in the United States only produced average growth for the year, while activity in the euro area was consistently mediocre. 
Geopolitical tensions and natural phenomena also weighed on trade growth in 2014. 
The crisis in theUkraine persisted throughout the year, straining trade relations between Russia on the one hand and theUnited States and European Union on the other. 
Conflict in the Middle East also stoked regional instability, as did an outbreak of Ebola haemorrhagic fever in WestAfrica. 
Finally, declines in first quarter trade and output in the United States were attributed to unusually harsh winter weather and a port strike.
In the opening months of 2015, a variety of economic data, including quarterly GDP statistics and surveys of business sentiment, pointed to a firming of the recovery in the European Union, an easing of output growth in the United States, and moderating activity in emerging economies. 
The euro area saw GDP increases of1.6 per cent (annualized) in both the last quarter of2014 and the first quarter of 2015 after recording growth of 0.7 per cent on average in the previous three quarters. 
Meanwhile, growth turned slightly negative in the United States in the first quarter after three quarters of solid growth. 
Similarly contrasting results were seen in emerging economies. 
China's GDPgrowth slowed for the third consecutive quarter in the first quarter of 2015, but remained strong compared to other countries at around 5.5 per cent (annualized).
At the same time, India's growth accelerated to 8.7 per cent while Brazil's economy registered a decline of 0.8 per cent. 
Meanwhile, economic activity in Russia was weak throughout 2014 and in early 2015.
From the vantage point of the second quarter of 2015, the divergence of monetary policies in the United States and the euro area was seen as a significant risk to global trade and output in the second half of the year,as the Federal Reserve contemplated raising interest rates just as the European Central Bank was entering a phase of monetary easing. 
Rising interest rates in the United States could have unpredictable knock-on effects in developing economies, stoking volatility infinancial markets, exchange rates and investment flows.
The rough two-to-one relationship that prevailed for many years between world trade volume growth and world GDP growth appears to have broken down, as illustrated by the fact that trade and output have grown at around the same rate for the last three years. 
Based on first quarter results in 2015, modest recoveries inboth world trade and output appear to be underway in the first half of 2015, which suggests little change in this ratio for the year.
Trade developments in 2014
Annual data on merchandise and commercial services trade in current US dollar terms are presented inAppendix Tables 1 to 6. 
These tables show that the dollar value of world merchandise trade stagnated in 2014, as exports rose just 0.6 per cent to US $ 18.93trillion. 
This growth rate is lower than the one for merchandise trade in volume terms mentioned above (2.5 per cent for the average of exports and imports), reflecting falling export and import prices from one year to the next, particularly for primary commodities.
By comparison, growth in the dollar value of world commercial services exports was stronger, increasing by 4 per cent in 2014 to US $ 4.85 trillion. 
It should be noted that the commercial services values are compiled using a new services classification in the balance of payments. 
Thus, figures are not directly comparable to those from earlier years.
One striking feature of the merchandise trade values in 2014 is the weakness of trade flows in natural resource exporting regions. 
The dollar value of exports from South America, the Commonwealth ofIndependent States (CIS), Africa and the Middle East fell 5.8 per cent, 5.8 per cent, 7.6 per cent and 4.4 percent, respectively, as lower commodity prices cut into export revenues. 
A sharp drop in South America's imports (4.6 per cent) reflected recessionary conditions in leading regional economies, while an even steeper decline in CIS imports (11.4 per cent)stemmed from a combination of factors, including falling oil prices and regional conflict.
(a) Quarterly merchandise trade developments
For broad country aggregates and regions that do not export natural resources predominantly, trade statistics in volume terms provide a clearer picture of trade developments. 
The WTO and UNCTAD jointly produce a variety of short-term trade statistics, including seasonally adjusted quarterly merchandise trade volume indices. 
These are shown in Figure 2 by level of development.
World exports in volume terms only increased by 2.0per cent in the first half of 2014 compared to the same period in 2013, but year-on-year growth in the second half rose to 3.4 per cent. 
Exports of developed and developing/emerging economies were both slow in the first half (1.7 per cent and 2.6 per cent, respectively) but shipments from developing/emerging countries grew faster in the second half (2.4 per cent for developed,4.8 per cent for developing).
Weak import demand in the European Union has weighed heavily on world trade in recent years due to the large share of the EU in world imports (32 per cent in 2014 including trade between EU member countries,15 per cent excluding it). 
Quarterly EU trade volume developments are shown in Figure 3.
Extra-EU exports in volume terms were flat for most of 2014 as demand in trading partners faltered.Meanwhile, EU imports staged a recovery as total imports (i.e. intra plus extra) rose 3.2 per cent over the previous year. 
Imports stalled toward the end of the year, growing 0 per cent in the fourth quarter before resuming their upward trajectory. 
A strong economic recovery in Europe may be necessary before the world can expect to see higher rates of global trade growth.
Regional trade developments in volume terms are shown in Figure 4. 
Asia and North America had the fastest export growth in 2014. 
Shipments from South America and other regions (i.e. Africa, the CIS and the MiddleEast) were mostly flat, but this is to be expected since traded quantities of oil and other natural resources tend to be insensitive to price changes. 
European exports grew more slowly, held back by weak import demand in the region.
North American imports in volume terms grew steadily in 2014, as did Asian imports following a setback in the second quarter. 
Imports of other regions (i.e. Africa, theMiddle East and the CIS) also grew in the second half of the year despite falling commodity prices, but SouthAmerica's imports continued to trend downward after peaking in the second quarter of 2013. 
South American imports bounced back sharply in the first quarter of 2015, but whether this rebound is durable remains to be seen). 
Finally, European imports remained depressed,having only recently surpassed their level of 2011 Q3.
Figure 5 shows estimated year-on-year growth in the dollar value of world trade in selected categories of manufactured goods. 
By the fourth quarter of 2014,trade in iron and steel had risen by 2.4 per cent compared to the same quarter in 2013, while shipments of office and telecom equipment were up 3 per cent. 
However,year-on-year growth in the dollar value of trade inother manufactured goods turned negative in Q4, with declines of between 1 per cent and 3 per cent. 
Since the financial crisis of 2008-09, trade in automotive products has tended to be a leading indicator of world trade, while trade in iron and steel has been a lagging indicator. 
With demand for automobiles turning down,steel exporters like China may face reduced demand for the products overseas.
Merchandise trade figures in dollar terms should be interpreted with caution since these data are strongly influenced by exchange rates, including the appreciation of the US dollar since the middle of last year (up around12 per cent on average between July 2014 and June2015 ¨C see Figure 6).
(b) Trade developments in commercial services 
Figure 7 provides a breakdown of commercial services exports by WTO geographic region. 
All regions saw modest increases in services exports of between 1 and5 per cent in 2014, except the CIS, which registered a strong decline of 7 per cent that included drops intransport services (-2.3 per cent), travel (-12.1) and other business services (-6.3). 
Imports are not shown in Figure 6, but the story is similar, with all regions recording modest increases except the CIS, which declined by 2 per cent in the latest year.