2010 DIETARYGUIDELINES FOR AMERICANS BACKGROUNDER:
I. Introduction
Purpose
The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans (DGA) establish the scientific and policy basis for all Federal nutrition programs, including research, education, nutrition assistance, labeling, and nutrition promotion.
The DGA offer advice for healthy Americans ages 2 years and over about making food choices that promote health and reduce disease risk. 
The DGA provides a consistent, science-based foundation for nutrition efforts by the various government agencies.
All federally-issued dietary guidance for the general public is required by law to be consistent with the Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
History
The first edition of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans was released in 1980. 
Beginning with the 1985 edition, the Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Health and Human Services (HHS) appointed a Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (DGAC) of prominent experts in nutrition and health to review current scientific and medical knowledge and recommend revisions to the Secretaries.
Section 301 of the National Nutrition Monitoring and Related Research Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-445, Title III, 7U.S.C. 5301), requires the Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Health and Human Services (HHS) to jointly publish the Dietary Guidelines for Americans at least every 5 years.
Since 1980, the Dietary Guidelines have been not ably consistent in their recommendations on the components of a healthful diet, but they also have changed in significant ways to reflect the emerging science.
The Federal Advisory Committee Act and Quality of Information Act set major requirements for open, systematic, and transparent federal advisory committee operations.
These requirements have informed the current processes used in reviewing the literature, for encouraging public participation and for making information transparent and easily available to everyone.
Changes made to proactively meet these requirements for the 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans included:
Implementation of USDA¡¯s Nutrition EvidenceLibrary which used rigorous, systematic,and transparent methodology, designed to minimize bias, and ensure the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of the information used to develop Federal guidance.
Initiation of the www.NutritionEvidenceLibrary.gov (or www.NEL.gov )Web site to serve as a publicly available store house for all research protocols, literature selection decisions, evidence summary materials, and graded conclusion statements
Initiation of the easily retrievable and searchable Dietary Guidelines Web site,www.dietaryguidelines.gov, to centrally house all Dietary Guidelines related content and information
Development of a public comments database for simple comment submissions during the comment period, and viewing by any one at any time
Use of webinars to broadcast meetings that were viewed across the globe with attendance doubling from previous in-person only meetings 
Ability to archive public meeting documents and audio recordings online for continued public access, beyond the initial meeting date.
Process for Developing the 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans
For the 2010 edition of the Guidelines, the departments appointed a DGAC of 13 nationally recognized experts in nutrition and health to review the sixth edition of the Dietary Guidelines(released in January of 2005) to determine whether revisions were warranted and provide suggestions for these revisions. 
Committee members were:
Chair
Linda Van Horn,PhD, RD, LD
Northwestern University, Chicago, Ill.
Vice Chair
Naomi K. Fukagawa,MD, PhD
University of Vermont, Burlington, Vt.
Members
Cheryl Achterberg,PhD
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
Lawrence J. Appel, MD, MPH
Johns HopkinsMedical Institutions, Baltimore, Md.
Over the period of a year and a half, the DGAC conducted an extensive evidence-based review of scientific and medical literature regarding the role of diet and nutrition in health promotion and disease prevention, and submitted a report summarizing their findings. 
The DGAC held six public meetings between October 2008 and May 2010 and submitted their Advisory Report to the Secretaries of USDA and HHS in June 2010.
The report included two chapters new to the 2010 edition, which set the stage for the rest of the report: ¡°The Total Diet: Combining Nutrients, Consuming Food¡± and ¡°Translating and Integrating the Evidence: A Call to Action.¡±
It also included eight chapters that reviewed and summarized the science and provided conclusions for specific topic areas: Energy Balance &amp; Weight Management; Nutrient Adequacy; Fatty Acids and Cholesterol; Protein; Carbohydrates; Sodium, Potassium &amp; Water; Alcohol; and Food Safety &amp; Technology.
The Report highlighted an urgent need to address overweight and obesity, especially in children. Strategies to prevent childhood obesity were included.
The Report also gave focus to changes needed in the overall food environment.
A Federal Register notice announcing the availability of the Advisory Report and a 30-day public comment period was published on June 15, 2010.
A public meeting with opportunity to provide oral testimony on the Advisory Report was held on July 8, 2010.
Agencies in each department were also invited to provide comments on the Advisory Report regarding any program-specific polic implications. 
USDA-CNPP and HHS-ODPHP staff compiled public and Agency comments submitted.
The joint working group of USDA-CNPP and HHS-ODPHP nutritionists translated the Advisory Report into a draft of the 2010 Dietary Guidelines policy document; public and agency comments on the DGAC Report were considered at that time.
The draft policy document was peer-reviewed according to the requirements of the Quality of Information Act specified by OMB¡¯s ¡°Final Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review,¡± published inJanuary 14, 2005 FR Notice (Vol. 70, No. 10).
Review was for clarity, technical accuracy, and consistency with the Advisory Report.
The Dietary Guidelines policy document was finalized and cleared through the departments in December 2010.
Secretaries Vilsack and Sebelius jointly released the seventh edition of the 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans in January 2011.
The policy document is available on line at www.Dietary Guidelines.gov. Consumer materials and tools to implement the Guidelines will be released throughout the five-year lifespan of the Guidelines.
II. 2010 Dietary Guidelines Policy Document
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans Policy document is intended for an audience of professionals in nutrition, health, and education to help them in developing educational materials and for policymakers to help them in designing and carrying out nutrition-related programs.
The 2010 DGA includes 23 Key Recommendations for all Americans, and six additional recommendations for specific population groups.
It is comprised of six chapters that summarize and synthesize knowledge about individual nutrients and food components into an interrelated set of recommendations for healthy eating that can be adopted by the public.
The chapters are:
Chapter1: Introduction.
This chapter introduces the document and provides information and background and purposes.
Chapter 2:Balancing Calories to Manage Weight.
This chapter explains the concept of calorie balance, describes some of the environmental forces that have contributed to the current epidemic of overweight and obesity, and discusses diet and physical activity principles that can be used to help Americans achieve calorie balance.
Chapter 3:Foods and Food Components to Reduce.
This chapter focuses on several dietary components that Americans generally consume in excess compared to recommendations.
These include sodium, solid fats (major sources of saturated fats and trans fats), cholesterol, added sugars, refined grains, and for someAmericans, alcohol.
The chapter explains that reducing foods and beverages that contain relatively high amounts of these dietary components and replacing them with foods and beverages that provide substantial amounts of nutrients and relatively few calories would improve the health of Americans.
Chapter 4:Foods and Nutrients to Increase. 
This chapter focuses on the nutritious foods that are recommended for nutrient adequacy, disease prevention, and overall good health.
These include vegetables; fruits; whole grains; fat-free or low-fat milk and milk products (dairy products); protein foods, including seafood, lean meat and poultry, eggs, beans and peas, soy products, nuts, and seeds; and oils.
Additionally, nutrients of public health concern, including potassium, dietary fiber, calcium, and vitamin D are discussed.
Chapter 5: Building Healthy Eating Patterns. This chapter shows how the recommendations and principles described in earlier chapters can be combined into a healthy overall eating pattern.
The USDA Food Patterns and DASH Eating Plan are healthy eating patterns that provide flexible templates, allowing all Americans to stay within calorie limits, meet their nutrient needs, and reduce chronic disease risk.
Chapter 6: Helping Americans Make Healthy Choices. 
This chapter discusses two critically important facts.
The first is that the current food and physical activity environment is influential in the nutrition and activity choices that people make¡ªfor better and for worse.
The second is that all elements of society, including individuals and families, communities, business and industry, and various levels of government, have a positive and productive role to play in the movement to make America healthy.
The chapter suggests a number of ways that these players can work together to improve the Nation¡¯s nutrition and physical activity.
III. Nutrition Education and Consumer Materials 
Consumer research is being conducted to evaluate consumer understanding, attitudes and beliefs about food and nutrition, in order to better encourage the public to make healthier food choices.
CNPP and ODPHP will develop simple, direct, actionable messages, tools, and information as part of the Dietary Guidelines nutrition education and communication efforts.
Communication information on the DietaryGuidelines will be available for professionals at: www.dietaryguidelines.govand www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines.
Consumer information will be available at: www.mypyramid.gov and at: www.healthfinder.gov/prevention.