Questions and Answers on the 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans
General Overview
What are the Dietary Guidelines for Americans (DGA)?
The DGA provides advice for making food choices that promote good health, a healthy weight, and help prevent disease for healthy Americans ages 2 and over.
The advice is based on a rigorous review of the scientific evidence through a transparent, unbiased process. 
The DGA is congressionally mandated under the 1990 National Nutrition Monitoring and Related Research Act (Public Law 101-445, Section 301 [7 U.S.C. 5341], Title III).
It is released by the Secretaries of USDA and HHS every five years.
Why are the Dietary Guidelines important?
They form the basis of Federal nutrition policy, education, outreach, and food assistance programs used by consumers, industry, nutrition educators and health professionals. 
All Federal dietary guidance for the public is required to be consistent with the DGA.
The guidelines provide the scientific basis for the government to speak in a consistent and uniform manner. They are used in the development of materials, messages, tools and programs to communicate healthy eating and physical activity to the public.
How do the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (DGAC) Report and the Dietary Guidelines for Americans relate to each other?
The DGAC Report is a scientific advisory report and presents the recommendations of the external 2010 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee to the Secretaries of USDA and HHS for use in updating the official Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
The DGAC Report is written for the Federal government as the basis for developing the Dietary Guidelines for Americans (DGA). Comments from Federal agencies and the public are considered in the development of the DGA.
The DGA is intended for policymakers, nutrition educators and health professionals in developing nutrition policy, nutrition education messages and consumer materials for the general public and for specific audiences, such as children.
How will the DGAC Report and the DGA be made available?
The DGAC Report was released in June 2010 and is available at www.dietaryguidelines.gov along with the DGA policy document.
Limited numbers of hard copies of both documents will be available, and requests and ordering information will be found at www.dietaryguidelines.gov.
Why are the Dietary Guidelines only for ages 2 years and older?
The DGA has always focused on adults and children 2 years of age and older. Children under 2 years of age are not included because their nutritional needs and eating patterns vary by their developmental stage and differ substantially from those of older children and adults. 
A separate committee for reviewing nutrition and physical activity needs of pregnant women and children from birth to 2 years old could be beneficial as it would be made up of scientists and nutrition professionals who are experts in those very specialized topic areas of infant development and infant feeding practices.
Why are the Dietary Guidelines revised every five years?