About Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST)
The Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) is one of the core institutions responsible for the implementation of science and technology policy in Japan, including the government¡¯s Science and Technology Basic Plan. 
From knowledge creation¡ªthe wellspring of innovation¡ªto ensuring that the fruits of research are shared with society and Japan¡¯s citizens, JST undertakes its mission in a comprehensive manner. 
JST also works to provide a sound infrastructure of science and technology information and raise awareness and understanding of science and technology-related issues in Japan.
Mission: We contribute to the creation of innovation in science and technology as the core implementing agency of the fourth phase of the Science and Technology Basic Plan.
Visions:
To achieve innovation in science and technology through creative research and development.
To maximize research outcomes by managing research resources on the virtual network.
To develop the nation¡¯s infrastructure for science and technology to accelerate innovation in science and technology.
Description: In the third phase of the mid-term plan commenced in FY 2012, JST promotes the following operations:
Planning of research and development strategy for the creation of innovation
Promoting the creation of innovation
Strategic Basic Research Programs
Research and Development Programs Focused on Technology Transfer
Support for reconstruction and revitalization after the Great East Japan Earthquake
Promotion and Support for International Cooperation
Programs to Promote the Utilization of University IP
Building infrastructure for the creation of innovation
Dissemination of Scientific and Technological Information
Promoting Science Education
Promoting Science Communication
Others
Priority Areas: Working toward the creation of innovation in science and technology, we will focus on the following areas in accordance with the fourth phase of the national Science and Technology Basic Plan, and effectively create new systems and services by combining various programs.
science and technology policy in Japan: 
For details, please refer to website of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science below, http://www.mext.go.jp/english/a06.htm
Science and Technology Basic Plan: 
The Science and Technology Basic plan is drawn up based on the Science and Technology Basic Law every five year in Japan. 
There are two steps to draw up the basic plan. 
First, Council for Science and Technology Policy (CSTP) deliberates the basic policy about science and technology. 
Second, based on that, the government formulates and decides a basic plan. 
The current basic plan is the 4th one. 
(FY2011 - FY2015)