A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE MUSEUM
The Metropolitan Museum of Art was founded in 1870 by a group of American citizens 每 businessmen and financiers as well as leading artists and thinkers of the day 每 who wanted to create a museum to bring art and art education to the American people.
The Metropolitan's paintings collection also began in 1870, and continued to grow for the rest of the 19th century. 
It is the 20th century that has seen the Museum's rise to the position of one of the world's great art centers. 
Some highlights: a work by Renoir entered the Museum as early as 1907 (today the Museum has become one of the world's great repositories of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist art)...in 1910 the Metropolitan was the first public institution to accept works of art by Matisse...by 1979 the Museum owned five of the fewer than 40 known Vermeers...the Department of Greek and Roman Art now oversees thousands of objects, including one of the finest collections in glass and silver in the world...The American Wing holds the most comprehensive collection of American art, sculpture, and decorative arts in the world...the Egyptian art collection is the finest outside Cairo...the Islamic art collection is without peer...and so on, through many of the 17 curatorial departments. 
In 1880, the Metropolitan Museum moved to its current site in Central Park. The present facade and entrance structure along Fifth Avenue were completed in 1926. 
A comprehensive architectural plan for the Museum approved in 1971 was completed in 1991. 
With the building now complete, the Metropolitan Museum continues to refine and reorganize the collections in its existing spaces. In June 1998, the Arts of Korea gallery opened to the public, completing a major suite of galleries 每 a "museum within the Museum" 每 devoted to the arts of Asia. 
In October 1999 the renovated Ancient Near Eastern Galleries reopened. And a complete renovation and reinstallation of the Greek and Roman Galleries is underway.