Internet False Identification Prevention Act of 2000
PUBLIC LAW 106¨C578¡ªDEC. 28, 2000
114 STAT. 3075
Public Law 106¨C578
106th Congress
An Act To strengthen the enforcement of Federal statutes relating to false identification, and for other purposes. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ¡®¡®Internet False Identification Prevention Act of 2000¡¯¡¯.
SEC. 2. COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON FALSE IDENTIFICATION.
(a) IN GENERAL.
¡ªThe Attorney General and the Secretary of the Treasury shall establish a coordinating committee to ensure, through existing interagency task forces or other means, that the creation and distribution of false identification documents (as defined in section 1028(d)(3) of title 18, United States Code, as added by section 3(2) of this Act) is vigorously investigated and prosecuted.
(b) MEMBERSHIP.
¡ªThe coordinating committee shall consist of the Director of the United States Secret Service, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Attorney General, the Commissioner of Social Security, and the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, or their respective designees.
(c) TERM.
¡ªThe coordinating committee shall terminate 2 years after the effective date of this Act.
(d) REPORT.¡ª
(1) IN GENERAL.
¡ªThe Attorney General and the Secretary of the Treasury, at the end of each year of the existence of the committee, shall report to the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives on the activities of the committee.
(2) CONTENTS.
¡ªThe report referred to in paragraph (1) shall include¡ª
(A) the total number of indictments and informations, guilty pleas, convictions, and acquittals resulting from the investigation and prosecution of the creation and distribution of false identification documents during the preceding year;
(B) identification of the Federal judicial districts in which the indictments and informations were filed, and in which the subsequent guilty pleas, convictions, and acquittals occurred;
(C) specification of the Federal statutes utilized for prosecution;
(D) a brief factual description of significant investigations and prosecutions;
(E) specification of the sentence imposed as a result of each guilty plea and conviction; and
(F) recommendations, if any, for legislative changes that could facilitate more effective investigation and prosecution of the creation and distribution of false identification documents.
SEC. 3. FALSE IDENTIFICATION.
Section 1028 of title 18, United States Code, is amended¡ª
(1) in subsection (c)(3)(A), by inserting ¡®¡®, including the transfer of a document by electronic means¡¯¡¯ after ¡®¡®commerce¡¯¡¯; and
(2) in subsection (d)¡ª
(A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ¡®¡®template, computer file, computer disc,¡¯¡¯ after ¡®¡®impression,¡¯¡¯;
(B) in paragraph (5), bystriking ¡®¡®and¡¯¡¯ after the semicolon;
(C) by redesignating paragraph (6) as paragraph (8);
(D) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (5) as paragraphs (4) through (6), respectively;
(E) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
¡®¡®(3) the term ¡®false identification document¡¯ means a document of a type intended or commonly accepted for the purposes of identification of individuals that¡ª
¡®¡®(A) is not issued by or under the authority of a governmental entity; and
¡®¡®(B) appears to be issued by or under the authority of the United States Government, a State, a political subdivision of a State, a foreign government, a political subdivision of a foreign government, or an international governmental or quasi-governmental organization;¡¯¡¯; and
(F) by inserting after paragraph (6), as redesignated, the following:
¡®¡®(7) the term ¡®transfer¡¯ includes selecting an identification document, false identification document, or document-making implement and placing or directing the placement of such identification document, false identification document, or document-making implement on an online location where it is available to others; and¡¯¡¯.
SEC. 4. REPEAL.
Section 1738 of title 18, United States Code, and the item relating to that section in the table of contents for chapter 83 of that title, are repealed.
SEC. 5. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Approved December 28, 2000.