Preface
All over the world, ICT has empowered individuals with unprecedented access to information and knowledge, with important consequences in terms of providing education and access to markets, of doing business, and of social interactions, among others. 
Moreover, by increasing productivity and therefore economic growth in developing countries, ICT can play a formidable role in reducing poverty and improving living conditions and opportunities for the poor.
In these challenging times of global economic crisis, the extraordinary capacity of ICT to drive growth and innovation should not be overlooked, since it can play a critical role not only in facilitating countries¡¯ recovery but also in sustaining national competitiveness in the medium to long term.
At the World Economic Forum, we are strong believers in the link between economic growth and ICT readiness, a link that should be further emphasized in the face of the current severe economic downturn and calls for budget cuts.
The Global Information Technology Report (GITR) series, produced by the Forum in partnership with INSEAD and published annually since 2001, has contributed to raising awareness of the importance of ICT diffusion for overall competitiveness.
The broad methodological framework of the Networked Readiness Index (NRI), featured in the Report series, identifies the enabling factors that permit countries to fully benefit from ICT advances, stressing the key responsibility of all social actors¡ªindividuals, businesses, and governments.
The NRI has proven a unique tool for policymakers and all relevant stakeholders, allowing them to follow the progress of their country over time and vis-¨¤-vis relevant comparators, and providing a neutral and authoritative platform for public-private dialogue and for designing national policies and strategies that aim toward enhanced networked readiness and competitiveness.
The Global Information Technology Report 2008¨C2009, the eighth edition in the series, presents the latest findings of the NRI, providing an updated picture of the state of networked readiness in the world. 
Under the general theme of mobility, the Report notably highlights the remarkable role of mobile telephony¡ªpossibly the most revolutionary ICT¡ªin economic growth, and once again showcases success stories of countries able to leverage ICT for increased competitiveness.
Continuing our effort to expand the coverage of the Report, a record number of 134 economies, accounting for over 98 percent of the world¡¯s GDP, has been included this year. 
Also featured in the Report is a comprehensive data section containing detailed profiles for each economy covered and data tables with global rankings for nearly 70 indicators. 
A number of essays and case studies on mobility and best practices in networked readiness complement the Report.
We would like to express our gratitude to the respected academics and industry experts who contributed outstanding chapters to this Report, casting light on important aspects of mobility and ICT and highlighting best policies and practices in ICT diffusion and leverage.
We especially wish to thank the editors of the Report, Soumitra Dutta at INSEAD and Irene Mia at the World Economic Forum, for their leadership and longlasting dedication to the project. 
Appreciation also goes to Fiona Paua, who heads the Strategic Insight Teams, and the other members of the Global Competitiveness Network: Jennifer Blanke, Ciara Browne, Agustina Ciocia, Margareta Drzeniek Hanouz,Thierry Geiger, Pearl Samandari, and Eva Trujillo Herrera. 
Last but not least, we would like to convey our sincere gratitude to our network of 150 Partner Institutes around the world and to all the business executives who participated in our Executive Opinion Survey, without whose valuable input and support the production of this Report would not have been possible.
The Global Information Technology Report 2008-2009
2009 World Economic Forum