ITEM 1. BUSINESS
Overview
Google is a global technology leader focused on improving the ways people connect with information. 
Our innovations in web search and advertising have made our web site a top internet property and our brand one of the most recognized in the world. 
We maintain a large index of web sites and other online content, which we make freely available via our search engine to anyone with an internet connection. 
Our automated search technology helps people obtain nearly instant access to relevant information from our vast online index.
We generate revenue primarily by delivering relevant, cost-effective online advertising. 
Businesses use our AdWords program to promote their products and services with targeted advertising. 
In addition, the thousands of third-party web sites that comprise the Google Network use our AdSense program to deliver relevant ads that generate revenue and enhance the user experience.
We were incorporated in California in September 1998 and reincorporated in Delaware in August 2003. 
Our headquarters are located at 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, California 94043, and our telephone number is (650) 253-0000.
Our Mission
Our mission is to organize the world¡¯s information and make it universally accessible and useful. 
We believe that the most effective, and ultimately the most profitable, way to accomplish our mission is to put the needs of our users first. 
We have found that offering a high-quality user experience leads to increased traffic and strong word-of-mouth promotion. 
Our dedication to putting users first is reflected in three key commitments:
We will do our best to provide the most relevant and useful search results possible, independent of financial incentives. 
Our search results will be objective and we do not accept payment for search result ranking or inclusion.
We will do our best to provide the most relevant and useful advertising. 
Advertisements should not be an annoying interruption. 
If any element on a search result page is influenced by payment to us, we will make it clear to our users.
We will never stop working to improve our user experience, our search technology and other important areas of information organization.
We believe that our user focus is the foundation of our success to date. 
We also believe that this focus is critical for the creation of long-term value. 
We do not intend to compromise our user focus for short-term economic gain.
How We Provide Value to Our Users
We serve our users by developing products that quickly and easily find, create, organize and share information. 
We place a premium on products that matter to many people and have the potential to improve their lives.
Some of the key benefits we offer include:
Comprehensiveness and Relevance. 
Our search technologies sort through a vast and growing amount of information to deliver relevant and useful search results in response to user queries. 
This is an area of continual development for us. 
When we started the company in 1998, our web index contained approximately 30 million documents. We now index billions of web pages and strive to provide the most comprehensive search experience possible. 
Our team continually improves our relevance algorithms to objectively determine the best answers to our users¡¯ queries and to place these answers at the top of our search results. 
We are also constantly developing new functionality and enhancing our offerings to allow our users to more quickly and easily find information.
Objectivity. 
We believe it is very important that the results users get from Google are produced with only their interests in mind. 
We do not accept payment for search result ranking or inclusion. 
We do accept fees for advertising, but the advertising is clearly marked and separated and does not influence how we generate our search results. 
This is similar to a newspaper, where the articles are independent of the advertising. 
Inclusion and frequent updating in our index are open to all sites free of charge. 
We believe it is important for users to have access to the best available information, not just the information that someone pays for them to see.
Global Access. 
We strive to provide our services to everyone in the world and the Google interface is available in 120 languages. 
Through Google News, we offer an automated collection of frequently updated news stories in 24 languages in 61 editions. 
We also offer automatic translation of content between various languages and provide localized versions of Google in many developing countries.