The National Business Travel Association (NBTA) and Egencia have indicated that the global business travel spend is projected to exceed $986 billion by 2013.
Evaluating 72 countries, the study initiated by the NBTA and Egencia, shows that business travel growth patterns vary dramatically across the globe with North America advancing at an average rate of just over two percent per year for the last decade, Western Europe growing 4.6 percent annually and Asia Pacific advancing by 7.2 percent annually over the same period. 
Emerging Europe and the Middle East/Africa region advanced annually by 12.4 percent and 7.7 percent, respectively, from 1998 to 2008.
The study finds that the North America, Western Europe and Asia Pacific regions each represent about 30 percent of the global business travel market (90 percent combined), estimated to total $929 billion in 2008. 
This figure includes both domestic and outbound international travel.
The remaining 10 percent of global activity takes place in Latin America, Emerging Europe and the Middle East and Africa.
The United States represents the largest piece of global business travel spend with $261 billion or 28 percent of the world total, followed by China at 10 percent and Japan at 8 percent.
Growth story
The study predicts that the growth of business travel in China and Japan will exceed U.S. growth over the next five years.
In addition, developing nations, like India, Vietnam, Iran and Indonesia will experience significant compound annual growth rates over the same timeframe.
¡°Developing countries are proving to be fertile business-travel areas,¡± said Rob Greyber, president of Egencia. ¡°Over the next five years, we¡¯ll see countries like India and China grow at rates of 5.3 and 6.5 percent respectively, versus the U.S. projected growth rate of 0.3 percent.¡±
Overall, Asia Pacific is poised for substantial growth over the next five years, while US growth is expected to stagnate. 
China¡¯s spend, at $93.8 billion in 2008, has tripled over the past 10 years and is expected to lead market growth between 2008 and 2013, followed by Japan and South Korea. 
Measured in terms of the dollar increase in business travel spending, the United States is expected to be fourth in terms of growth, just behind India.
Over the next five years, sectors that directly benefit from both infrastructure development (utilities, government and communications) and economic stimulus packages (education, construction and real estate) will experience the most significant growth in business travel spend.