Virtual Criminology Report 2009
Virtually Here: The Age of Cyber Warfare
CONTENTS
Foreword
Introduction
Is the Age of Cyber War at Hand? 
The Private Sector in the Crosshairs
Setting the Agenda for a Public Debate on Cyber Defense Policy
Moving Forward
Contributors
Foreword
War is not a term to be tossed around lightly. 
That is why the growing debate over cyber war has caught our attention.
Introduction
Is the ¡°Age of Cyber War¡± at hand? 
This year, the fifth annual McAfee Virtual Criminology Report contemplates this question and others prompted by the fact that nation-states are arming themselves for the cyberspace battlefield.
Since our 2007 report, when we last discussed the growing cyber threat to national security, there have been increasing reports of cyber attacks and network infiltrations that appear to be linked to nation-states and political goals.
The most obvious of these attacks was the August 2008 cyber campaign against Georgia during the South Ossetia War. 
We decided it was time to further examine whether cyber warfare is now a part of human conflict that we should get used to seeing more often.
Three key findings emerged:
Although there is no commonly accepted definition for cyber war today, we have  seen nation-states involved in varying levels of cyber conflict. 
Further, while we have not yet seen a ¡°hot¡± cyber war between major powers, the efforts of nation-states to build increasingly sophisticated cyber attack capabilities, and in some cases demonstrate a willingness to use them, suggests that a ¡°Cyber Cold War¡± may have already begun.
If a major cyber conflict between nationstates were to erupt, it is very likely that the private sector would get caught in the crossfire. 
Most experts agree that critical infrastructure systems¡ªsuch as the electrical grid, banking and finance, and oil and gas sectors¡ª are vulnerable to cyber attack in many countries. 
Some nation-states are actively doing?reconnaissance to identify specific vulnerabilities in these networks. 
In the words of one expert, nation-states are ¡°laying the electronic battlefield and preparing to use it.¡±
Too much of the debate on policies related to cyber war is happening behind closed doors. 
Important questions, such as where to draw the line between cyber espionage and cyber war, are being discussed in private, or perhaps not at all. 
Many governments have chosen to keep debate on cyber conflict classified. 
Since governments, corporations and private citizens all have a stake in the future of the Internet, it is time to open a global dialogue on how to manage this new form of conflict.