Chapter 3 Statistical Description of Systems of Particles 
The preceding review of basic probability concepts has prepared us to turn the qualitative considerations of the first chapter into a systematic quantitative theory of systems consisting of very many particles. 
Our aim will be to combine statistical considerations with our knowledge of the laws of mechanics applicable to the particles constituting a macroscopic system. 
The resulting theory, therefore, is called statistical mechanics. 
The reasoning that leads to this theory is very simple and uses only the most primitive ideas of mechanics and probability. 
The beauty of the subject lies precisely in the fact that arguments of great simplicity and apparent innocence are capable of yielding results of impressive generality and predictive power.
Indeed, the arguments used to discuss a macroscopic system are completely analogous to those used to discuss the familiar experiment of tossing a set of coins. 
The essential ingredients for an analysis of this experiment are the following:
(i) Specification of the state of the system
 We must have available a method for specifying any of the possible outcomes of an experiment involving the system. 
For example, the state of the set of coins after any toss can be described by specifying which particular face of each coin is uppermost.
(ii) Statistical ensemble
We have far too little information about the precise manner in which the coins are tossed to be able to use the laws of mechanics to make a unique prediction about the outcome of any particular experiment. 
Hence we resort to a statistical description of the situation. 
Instead of considering the particular set of coins of interest, we thus focus attention on an ensemble consisting of a very large number of similar sets of coins subjected to the same experiment. 
We can then ask for the probability of occurrence of any experimental outcome. 
This probability can be measured by observing the ensemble and determining the fraction of systems exhibiting the particular outcome. Our theoretical aim is the prediction of any such probability.
(iii) Statistical postulates
To make theoretical progress, it is necessary to introduce some postulates. 
In the case of ordinary coins of uniform density, there is nothing intrinsic in the laws of mechanics which implies that one face of a coin should land uppermost more frequently than the other. 
Hence we are led to introduce the postulate that “a priori” (i.e., based on our prior notions as yet unverified by actual observations) a coin has equal probability of landing on each of its two faces. 
This postulate is eminently reasonable and certainly does not contradict any of the laws of mechanics. 
The actual validity of the postulate can, however, only be decided by using it to make theoretical predictions and by checking that these predictions are confirmed by experimental observations. 
To the extent that such predictions are consistently verified, the validity of this postulate can be accepted with confidence.
(iv) Probability calculations
Once the basic postulate has been adopted, we can calculate the probability of occurrence of any particular outcome involving the set of coins under consideration. 
We can also compute various mean values of interest. 
Thus we can answer all questions that can meaningfully be asked in a statistical theory.
In studying systems consisting of a large number of particles, our considerations will be very similar to those used in formulating the preceding problem of a set of coins. 
The next four sections will make this analogy explicit.
3.1 Specification of the State of a System
The study of atomic particles has shown that any system of such particles is described by the laws of quantum mechanics. 
These laws, whose validity is supported by an overwhelming amount of experimental evidence, will thus form the conceptual basis for our entire discussion.
In a quantum-mechanical description the most precise possible measurement on a system always shows this system to be in some one of a set of discrete quantum states characteristic of the system. 
The microscopic state of a system can thus be described completely by specifying the particular quantum state in which the system is found.
Each quantum state of an isolated system is associated with a definite value of its energy and is called an energy level. 
There may be several quantum states corresponding to the same energy of the system. (These quantum states are then said to be degenerate.) Every system has a lowest possible energy. 
There is usually only one possible quantum state of the system corresponding to this lowest energy; this state is said to be the ground state of the system. 
In addition there are, of course, many (indeed, ordinarily infinitely many) possible states with higher energies; these are called the excited states of the system.
The preceding comments are completely general and applicable to any system, no matter how complex. 
They are best illustrated by some simple examples of great practical interest.
(i) Single spin
Consider a single particle, assumed to be fixed in position, which has spin 1/2 and a magnetic moment of magnitude . . .. 
As already discussed in Sec. 1.3, this moment will be found to point either "up” " or "down” " (i.e., parallel or antiparallel) with respect to any specified direction. 
The system consisting of this single spin thus has only two quantum states which we shall label by a quantum number . . .. 
We can then denote the state where the magnetic moment of the particle points up by . . . = +1 , and the state where it points down by . . . = -1.
If the particle is in the presence of a magnetic field B, this field specifies the direction of physical interest in the problem. 
The energy E of the system then is lower when the magnetic moment is aligned parallel to the field rather than antiparallel to it. 
The situation is analogous to that of a bar magnet located in an external magnetic field. 
Thus, when the magnetic moment points up (i.e., parallel to the field B), its magnetic energy is simply . . .. Conversely, when the moment points down (i.e., antiparallel to the field B), its magnetic energy is simply . . .. 
The two quantum states (or energy levels) of the system then correspond to different energies.
(ii) Ideal system of N spins
Consider a system consisting of N particles, assumed to be fixed in position, where each particle has spin 1/2 and a magnetic moment . . .. The system is located in an applied magnetic field B.
The interaction between the particles is assumed to be almost negligible.
The magnetic moment of each particle can point either up or down with respect to the field B. 
The orientation of the ith moment can thus be specified by the value of its quantum number . . . so that . . .=+1 when this moment points up and . . .=-1 when it points down. 
A particular state of the whole system can then be specified by stating the orientation of each of the N moments, i.e., by specifying the values assumed by the set of quantum numbers {. . .,. . ., ..., . . .}. 
Thus one can enumerate, and label by some index . . ., all the possible states of the whole system. 
This is done in Table 3.2 for the special case where N = 4. 
The total magnetic moment of the system is simply equal to the sum of the magnetic moments of the individual spins. 
Since the interaction between these spins is almost negligible, the total energy E of the system is also simply equal to the sum of the energies of the individual spins.
(iii) Particle in a one-dimensional box
Consider a single particle, of mass m, free to move in one dimension. 
The particle is supposed to be confined within a box of length L, so that the particle's position coordinate x must lie in the range 0 <= x <= L. 
Within this box the particle is subject to no forces.
In a quantum-mechanical description, the particle has wave properties associated with it. 
The particle confined within the box and bouncing back and forth between its walls is thus represented by a wave function . . . in the form of a standing wave whose amplitude must vanish at the boundaries of the box (since . . . itself must vanish outside the box). 
The wave function thus must be of the form. . .
(where A and K are constants) and must satisfy the boundary conditions. . ..
The expression (1) obviously satisfies the condition . . . (0)= 0. 
In order that it also satisfy the condition . . .(L) = 0, the constant K must be such that . . . or . . .
where n can assume any of the integral values.
The constant K in (1) is the wave number associated with the particle; it is related to the wavelength . . . (the so-called de Broglie wavelength associated with the particle) by the relation
Hence (3) is equivalent to . . ., and represents merely the familiar condition that standing waves are obtained when the length of the box is equal to some integral multiple of half-wave-lengths.
The momentum p of the particle is related to K (or . . .) by the famous de Broglie relation . . ..
where . . . = h/2. . . and h is Planck's constant.
The energy E of the particle is simply its kinetic energy, since there is no potential energy due to external forces. 
Hence E can be expressed in terms of the velocity v or momentum p = mv of the particle as. . ..
The possible values (3) of K then yield the corresponding energies . . ..
Equivalently, we could have discussed the whole problem from a more mathematical point of view by starting from the fundamental Schrodinger equation for the wave function . . .. For a free particle in one dimension this equation is. . ..
The functional form (1) satisfies this equation provided that the energy E is related to K by (7). 
The condition (2) that the wave function must vanish at the boundaries of the box leads again to (3) and hence to the expression (8) for the energy.
The possible quantum states of the particle in the box thus can be specified by the possible values (4) of the quantum number n. 
The corresponding discrete energies of these states (i.e., the corresponding energy levels of the particle) are then given by (8).
The relation (8) shows that the separation in energy between successive quantum states of the particle is very small if the length L of the box is of macroscopic size. 
The lowest possible energy of the particle, i.e., its ground-state energy, corresponds to the state n = 1. 
Note that this ground-state energy does not vanish.
(iv) Particle in a three-dimensional box
The generalization of the preceding problem to the case of a particle free to move in three dimensions is straightforward.
Suppose that the particle is confined within a box in the shape of a rectangular parallelepiped of edge lengths Lx, Ly, and Lz. 
The position coordinates x, y, z of the particle then can be assumed to lie in the respective ranges . . ..
The particle has mass m and is subject to no forces within the box.
The wave function of the particle now represents a standing wave in three dimensions. 
Thus it is of the form. . ., where the constants Kx, Ky, Kz can be regarded as the three components of a vector K, the wave vector of the particle. 
According to the de Broglie relation the momentum of the particle is then given by . . ..
so that the relationship between the magnitude of p and the magnitude of K (or the wavelength . . .) is the same as in (6). 
The energy of the particle is then given by . . ..
Equivalently, it can be immediately verified that . . . in (9) is indeed a solution of the time-independent Schrodinger equation for a free particle in three dimensions, provided that E is related to K by (11).
The fact that . . . must vanish at the boundaries of the box imposes the conditions that . . ..
The expression (9) vanishes properly when x = 0, y = 0, or z = 0. 
To make it vanish for x = L x, y = Ly, or z = Lz, the constants Kx, Ky, Kz must satisfy the respective conditions.
