USE OF IMMUNOASSAYS BY THE FOOD INDUSTRY is increasing steadily.
The specificity and sensitivity of an antibody for an antigen have allowed the quantification of a variety of food components without the extraction and separation steps that are necessary in more conventional methods of analysis.
Applications of immunological assays for the detection and quantification of hormones, microorganisms, pesticides, antibiotics, mycotoxins, and proteins in meat products have been well documented (Fukal, 1991; Samarajeewa et al., 1991).
En zyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) have been prepared as commercial test kits for rapid screening of a variety of compounds in food products (Fukal, 1991; Samarajeewa et al., 1991).
These assays can be performed rapidly on a large number of samples by minimally trained personnel with small quantities of solvents and with no major scientific equipment in the field or processing plant.
Recently, interest has focused on the use of ELISAs in thermally processed foods (Paraf et al., 1991).
During processing, the concentration of a component may decrease as a result of heat treatment, or products formed as a result of heating may increase in concentration (Kim and Taub, 1993).
When protein indicators are used, antibodies can be prepared which are specific to either the native or denatured form of a protein. Thus, antibodies can be used to follow the appearance or disappearance of protein epitopes during heating.
This has allowed for the development of ELISAs to monitor thermal processing temperatures or to measure the quantity of a de natured indicator protein.
To illustrate the above applications, this article will discuss the advantages, development and verification of ELISAs to determine endpoint cooking temperatures and species adulteration of raw and cooked meat and poultry products.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has estimated that enteric pathogens, primarily associated with animal food products, cause 6.5-81 million cases of illness each year (Bean and Griffin, 1990). Inadequate cooking is commonly cited as a factor in foodborne disease outbreaks caused by meat products.
A 1993 outbreak of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli O157: H7 caused by consumption of under cooked ground beef patties illustrates the consequences of in adequate cooking.
There were more than 400 confirmed cases of E. coli O157: H7 infection, which resulted in 30 children with hemolytic uremic syndrome and four deaths (Mermelstein, 1993; Anonymous, 1993).
To aid in the prevention of foodborne disease caused by in adequate heat processing, the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture's Food Safety and Inspection Service requires that meat products be cooked to safe endpoint temperatures.
Title 9 of the Code of Federal Regulations lists required thermal processing schedules for a variety of precooked beef, pork, and poultry products to ensure destruction of pathogenic bacteria and viruses.
For example, uncured poultry products must be cooked to an internal temperature of 71.1°„C, whereas cured poultry products must be cooked to 68.3°„C (USDA, 1992a). Roast beef must be cooked to a minimum internal temperature of 62.8°„C or to other time-temperature combinations (USDA, 1992b).
In these alternative processes, beef may be processed to internal temperatures as low as 54.4°„C for 121 min or up to 62.2°„C for 5 min.
Although Salmonella, E. coli, and other pathogens are con trolled by USDA processing requirements, variation in processing often occurs.
Most bacterial outbreaks are attributed to institutional or foodservive operations in which strict time-temperature verification procedures are not required.
USDA uses several tests to monitor processing adequacy of meat products; these include the Bovine Catalase Test (USDA, 1989), Coagulation Test (USDA, 1986a), and Acid Phos phatase Activity Method (USDA, 1986b).
Other assays developed to monitor endpoint cooking temperature have been based on protein solubility (Steele and Lambe, 1982; Davis and Anderson, 1983), enzyme activity (Collins et al., 1991a, b; Stadler et al., 1991; Bogin et al., 1992; Townsend and Davis, 1992), color (Ang and Huang, 1992), electrophoretic patterns of protein extracts (Steele ana Lambe, 1982), differential scanning calorimetry of muscle proteins (Ellekjaer, 1992) and near-infrared spectroscopy (Isaksson et al., 1989; Ellekjaer and Isaksson, 1992).
Many of these methods are difficult to interpret, yield relatively imprecise estimates of endpoint cooking temperature, require the use of sophisticated scientific equipment and trained operators, or may not be readily applicable to high-volume operations be cause of the time needed to complete a test.
We recently developed several ELISAs that can be used to determine if poultry products have been cooked to the required USDA minimum endpoint temperatures.
By com paring electrophoretic patterns of extracts from turkey rolls processed to temperatures between 68 and 72°„C (Fig. 1), we found that lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was insolubilized when turkey rolls were processed to an internal temperature of 71°„C (Wang et al., 1992).
Polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies were prepared against purified LDH. We isolated and cloned four monoclonal antibodies specific LDH.
The most sensitive assay was obtained using a sandwich ELISA when monoclonal antibody D5E was used as the capture antibody and polyclonal antibodies were used for detection (Wang et al., 1992; Abouzied et al., 1993).
Bound antigen was detected using goat anti-rabbit IgG peroxidase conjugate with 2,2,-azino- bis (3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) as substrate (Fig. 2A).
LDH was detected at concentrations of 1 ng/mL of extract.
The antibodies were specific to turkey and chicken muscle LDH and did not cross-react with LDH from other sources.
This assay was verified using different processing conditions and product formulations and was compared to assays for LDH enzyme activity and extractable protein content.
Ex tractable protein content, LDH enzyme activity, and LDH concentration (measured by ELISA) were measured in ex tracts of turkey rolls processed to internal endpoint temperatures of 68.3, 69.7, 70.9, and 72.1°„C (Wang et al., 1993).
 Ex tractable protein and LDH activity could not be used to differentiate products cooked to 69.7°„C and above (Table 1).
The LDH concentration decreased as processing temperature increased.
The ELISA differentiated the LDH concentration of turkey rolls processed to the USDA minimum endpoint temperature from that of rolls processed to 2°„C below the minimum. Results were not influenced by salt content, product casing diameter, smoke house schedule, or frozen storage of the meat before processing.
On the basis of this study, we proposed that a maximum critical concentration of 0.31 ug of LDH/g of meat might be used to indicate adequacy of thermal processing of turkey breast rolls.
We are currently adapting this ELISA to a rapid field assay that could be commercialized as a test kit.
In our initial assay, we extracted protein from the geometric center of the roll and assayed the supernatant containing the soluble protein after centrifugation. We found that monoclonal antibody D5E is specific for the native form of LDH and does not react with the denatured form of the enzyme.
Therefore, it is not necessary to separate the native from thy denatured form of the enzyme by extraction and centrifugation. Drip from the center of the roll can be used without further purification.
Also, we have conjugated peroxidase directly to the poly clonal antibodies specific for LDH, thereby eliminating the use of goat anti-rabbit peroxidase conjugate as the third antibody (Fig. 2B). Thus, only two antibodies are used in the as say, and assay time is reduced because a third incubation and washing step was eliminated.
We are evaluating the stability of the capture antibody coated onto the microtiter plates. Microtiter plates can often be prepared up to 6 mo in advance without any loss of binding.
Alternatively, the capture antibody could be attached to a different solid support, such as a nitrocellulose membrane or a °∞dipstick,°± and used in place of microtiter plates.
Abouzied and Pestka (1994) have converted microplate assays for my cotoxins to a line-blot assay using nitrocellulose membranes to simultaneously assay three toxicants. With these modifications and optimization of incubation time, the assay should take less than 1 hr to complete and could be prepared as a self-contained field test kit.
We are currently developing similar assays for use as end point indicators in dark meat and cured poultry products, as well as in beef products.
Different marker proteins need to be identified for two reasons. First, different minimum processing temperatures are required by USDA regulations. Second, the heat stability of a protein may vary with species and may also vary between muscles from the same species.
For example, our LDH ELISA does not work as effectively in cured turkey thigh meat because of the presence of different LDH isozymes in breast and thigh with different heat stabilities (Wang et al., 1994). We are currently developing ELISAs to other indicator proteins to accurately determine compliance with minimum endpoint temperatures in cured poultry products (Desrocher, 1994; Wang et al., 1994).
The Meat Inspection Act of 1906 and the Federal Poultry Products Inspection Act of 1957 required USDA to assure that consumers purchase unadulterated and accurately labeled meat and poultry products (Mageau et al., 1984). Hsieh et al. (1992) sampled 806 raw and 96 cooked meat samples collected by Florida food inspectors in 1991. The authors reported a 16 and 23% adulteration rate in raw and cooked meat products, respectively.
Prevention of adulteration or fraudulent substitution of meat products with undeclared meat species is necessary to avoid economic losses, comply with religious dietary restrictions, and prevent allergic reactions in sensitive individuals.
Misbranded products are usually prepared to increase the profit of producers by substituting a less expensive meat.
For example, the ability to detect evidence of poaching or illegal sale of game, such as deer meat, or to verify the composition of imported meat is important to regulatory personnel and others.
Detection of trace quantities of adulteration may also indicate inadequate cleaning of processing equipment when different species are processed on the same line.
Raw Meat Products.
Techniques to detect species adulteration of raw meat products have been extensively re viewed by Patterson (1985) and Kang°Øethe (1990). These techniques include electrophoresis, isoelectric focusing, high-performance liquid chromatography, and immunoassays (Ashoor and Osman, 1988; Kang°Øethe, 1990; Samarajeewa et al., 1991; Zerifi et al., 1991).
Electrophoretic and chromatographic techniques are time consuming and require specialized scientific equipment and training (Slattery and Sinclair, 1987).
An immunodiffusion technique to detect the presence of raw poultry or beef has been approved by AOAC International (formerly the Association of Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC, 1990).
The field tests, called Overnight Rapid Bovine Identification Test (ORBIT) and Poultry Rapid Overnight Field Identification Test (PROFIT), are agar-gel immunodif fusion techniques that are easy to perform and require an 18- to 24-hr incubation step (Fig. 3).
These tests are generally applicable when the adulterant constitutes 10% or more of the meat, although as little as 5% adulteration can often be detected.
Similar species identification field tests (SIFT) have been developed for pork, sheep, horse, and deer meat (Cutrufelli et al., 1988, 1989, 1991, 1992). Other experimental immunodif fusion techniques can detect a minimum of 3% contamination in raw meat (Samarajeewa et al., 1991).
Several ELISAs for detection of species adulteration in raw meat have been developed using polyclonal antibodies against serum albumins (Jones and Patterson, 1986; Ayob et al., 1989) or sarcoplasmic proteins (Martin et al., 1988a, b).
In these as says, it was necessary to reduce species cross-reactivity by munosorbent affinity chromatography of each batch of poly clonal antibodies.
To eliminate this problem and to ensure a continuous and consistent supply of antibody, several monoclonal-based ELI SAs were developed, Martin et al. (1991) described the preparation of a sandwich ELISA for the detection of chicken meat.
Monoclonal antibodies specific for a chicken muscle soluble protein were used as the capture antibody. This protein was tentatively identified as 3-phosphoglycerate kinase (Martin et al., 1989). Polyclonal antibodies against these chicken muscle soluble proteins, tentatively identified as 3-phosphoglycerate kinase, were used as the capture antibody (Martin et al., 1989), Wang et al. (1995) developed a sandwich ELISA, using two different monoclonal antibodies to lactate dehydrogenase, that detected the presence of turkey meat.
Both tests were able to detect 1 % adulteration of chicken or turkey in beef and pork products.