Chapter 13 Social Behavior 
Audrey, a 16-year-old junior in high school, takes her cell phone with her everywhere, yet she is loathe to actually talk on her phone. 
She will do anything to avoid phone conversations. 
The immediacy of real-time conversation intimidates her. 
It's not that her phone goes unused. She uses it constantly for texting, which she prefers because she has more control over the communication. 
She can take time to think and edit her thoughts. 
She also uses her phone's camera all day long. She snaps away and posts many pictures to Facebook. 
"I like to feel that my life is up there," she says. 
But the life depicted on her Facebook profile le is a carefully crafted one. 
She agonizes over which photos to post. 
Which ones will portray her in the best light? 
Which ones will project an appealing "bad" girl image without going too far?
The comments Audrey gets about what she posts shape what she does next. 
Say Audrey experiments with a flirty style on Facebook. If she gets a good response from her Facebook friends, she'll escalate the flirty tone. 
One day, she tries out "an ironic, witty" tone in her wall posts. The response is not particularly enthusiastic, so she backs off. 
Friends who know Audrey in real life give her some leeway as she bends reality a bit. 
She reciprocates by not challenging their self-presentations.
But sometimes a little spat online can spin out of control. 
Audrey clashed with a classmate, Logan, in a chat room one day. 
Feeling she'd been wrong, she apologized to him the next day at school. 
But Logan wasn't satisfied. 
He brought the quarrel back online, this time posting his side of the story on Audrey's Facebook page, where all her friends would see it. 
Audrey felt she had to fight back to counter his smoldering version of what had happened. 
Day after day, Audrey spent hours in angry online exchanges as friends from both sides joined in the fray. 
Even six months later, she and Logan, who had been "really good friends" avoided each other in the hall. 
Eventually, Logan apologized, but it was "an online apology."
 " It's cheap. It's easy. All you have to do is type ¡®I'm sorry.' You don't have to have any emotion, any believability in your voice or anything," 
Audrey said. "With an online apology, there are still unanswered questions: ¡®Is he going to act weird to me now? Are we just going to be normal?' You don't know how the two worlds are going to cross." 
Despite her own beliefs about doing certain things in person, Audrey acknowledges that she once broke up with a boyfriend online. 
She readily admits that she endorses the norm that one should not break off a relationship via text or other online communication, but she claims she just couldn't help herself. 
"I felt so bad, because I really did care for him, and I couldn't get myself to say it. . .. 
I wasn't trying to chicken out, I just couldn't form the words, so I had to do it online, and I wish I hadn't. He deserved to have me do it in person. . .. 
I'm very sorry for it. 
I just think it was a really cold move, and kind of lame."
The preceding account is a real story, taken from Sherry Turkle's (2011) book Alone Together, which provides a fascinating analysis of how modern technology is altering the fabric of social relationships. 
Audrey's story illustrates something that you probably already know¡ªsocial relationships assume enormous importance in our lives. 
Audrey, like most of us, is deeply concerned about how others perceive her. 
She agonizes over the demise of her friendship with Logan and her inability to break up with her boyfriend face to face. 
Audrey's story also illustrates how advances in technology are reshaping the nature of social behavior. 
More and more social interactions are migrating onto the Internet. Intimate relationships are increasingly forged at online dating sites. 
Work groups increasingly conduct their business from distant locations via the Internet. 
People increasingly form their impressions of others from what is posted on social networking sites. 
Whether these shifts will prove to be fundamental or superficial alterations in our social landscape remains to be seen.
In any event, in this chapter we take a look at our social world. 
Social psychology is the branch of psychology concerned with the way individuals' thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are influenced by others. 
Social psychologists study how people are affected by the actual, imagined, or implied presence of others. 
Their interest is not limited to individuals' interactions with others, as people can engage in social behavior even when they're alone. 
For instance, if you were driving by yourself on a deserted highway and tossed your trash out your car window, your littering would be a social action. 
It would defy social norms, reflect your socialization and attitudes, and have repercussions (albeit, small) for other people in your society. 
Social psychologists often study individual behavior in a social context. 
This interest in understanding individual behavior should be readily apparent in our first section, on person perception.
Person Perception: Forming Impressions of Others
Can you remember the first meeting of your introductory psychology class? 
What impression did your professor make on you that day? 
Did your instructor appear to be confident? Easygoing? Pompous? Open-minded? Cynical? Friendly? 
Were your first impressions supported or undermined by subsequent observations? 
When you interact with people, you're constantly engaged in person perception, the process of forming impressions of others. 
People show considerable ingenuity in piecing together clues about others' characteristics. 
However, impressions are often inaccurate because of the many biases and fallacies that occur in person perception. 
In this section we consider some of the factors that influence, and often distort, people's perceptions of others.
Effects of Physical Appearance 
"Don't judge a book by its cover." 
People know better than to let physical attractiveness determine their perceptions of others' personal qualities. 
Or do they? 
Recent studies have found that good-looking people command more attention than less-attractive individuals do (Lorenzo, Biesanz, & Human, 2010; Maner et al., 2007). 
And many studies have shown that judgments of others' personality are often swayed by their appearance, especially their physical attractiveness. 
People tend to ascribe desirable personality characteristics to those who are good-looking. 
That is, attractive people tend to be seen as more sociable, friendly, poised, warm, and well-adjusted than those who are less attractive (Macrae & Quadflieg, 2010; van Leeuwen, Matthijs, & Macrae, 2004). 
In reality, research suggests that little correlation exists between attractiveness and personality traits (Feingold, 1992). 
Why do people inaccurately assume that a connection exists between good looks and personality? 
One reason is that extremely attractive people are vastly overrepresented in the entertainment media, where they are mostly portrayed in a highly favorable light (Smith, McIntosh, & Bazzini, 1999). 
Another reason is that one's perceptions are swayed by one's desire to bond with attractive people (Lemay, Clark, & Greenberg, 2010).
You might guess that physical attractiveness would influence perceptions of competence less than perceptions of personality, but the data suggest otherwise. 
Research has found that people have a strong tendency to view good-looking individuals as more competent than less attractive individuals (Langlois et al., 2000). 
This bias literally pays off for good-looking people. 
They tend to secure better jobs and earn higher salaries than less attractive individuals (Collins & Zebrowitz, 1995; Senior et al., 2007). 
For example, a study of attorneys whose law school class photos were evaluated by independent raters found that physical attractiveness boosted their actual income by 10%¨C12% (Engemann & Owyang, 2005). 
Another recent study (Judge, Hurst, & Simon, 2009) compared the impact of brains versus beauty on income. 
As one would expect (and hope), intelligence was more strongly related to earnings (correlation = .50) than good looks. 
But the correlation of .24 between attractiveness and income was not trivial.
Observers are also quick to draw inferences about people based on how they move, talk, and gesture¡ª that is, their style of nonverbal expressiveness. Moreover, these inferences tend to be fairly accurate (Ambady & Rosenthal, 1993; Borkenau et al., 2004). 
For example, based on a mere 10 seconds of videotape, participants can guess strangers' sexual orientation (heterosexual-homosexual) with decent accuracy (Ambady, Hallahan, & Conner, 1999). 
Based on similar "thin slices" of behavior, observers can make accurate judgments of individuals' racial prejudice, social status, and intelligence (Ambady & Weisbuch, 2010). 
Even static photographs can provide telling cues about personality. 
One recent study found that participants were able to make meaningful inferences about stimulus persons' extraversion, openness to experience, agreeableness, and self- esteem based on simple photographs (Naumann et al., 2009).
Stereotypes
Stereotypes can have a dramatic effect on the process of person perception. 
Stereotypes are widely held beliefs that people have certain characteristics because of their membership in a particular group. 
The most common stereotypes in our society are those based on gender, age, and membership in ethnic or occupational groups. 
People who subscribe to traditional gender stereotypes tend to assume that women are emotional, submissive, illogical, and passive, while men are unemotional, dominant, logical, and aggressive. 
Age stereotypes suggest that elderly people are slow, feeble, rigid, forgetful, and asexual. 
Notions that Jews are mercenary, Germans are methodical, and Italians are passionate are examples of common ethnic stereotypes. 
Occupational stereotypes suggest that lawyers are manipulative, accountants are conforming, artists are moody, and so forth.
Stereotyping is a normal cognitive process that is usually automatic and that saves on the time and effort required to get a handle on people individually (Fiske & Russell, 2010). 
Stereotypes save energy by simplifying our social world. 
However, this energy savings often comes at some cost in terms of accuracy (Stangor, 2009). 
Stereotypes tend to be broad overgeneralizations, ignoring the diversity within social groups and fostering inaccurate perceptions of people. 
Most people who subscribe to stereotypes realize that not all members of a group are identical. For instance, they may admit that some men aren't competitive, some Jews aren't mercenary, and some lawyers aren't manipulative. 
However, they may still tend to assume that males, Jews, and lawyers are more likely than others to have these characteristics. 
Even if stereotypes mean only that people think in terms of slanted probabilities, their expectations may lead them to misperceive individuals with whom they interact. 
As we've noted in previous chapters, perception is subjective. 
People often see what they expect to see.
Subjectivity in Person Perception
Stereotypes create biases in person perception that often lead to confirmation of people's expectations about others. 
If someone's behavior is ambiguous, people are likely to interpret what they see in a way that's consistent with their expectations (Olson, Roese, & Zanna, 1996). 
Thus, after dealing with a pushy female customer, a salesman who holds traditional gender stereotypes might characterize the woman as "emotional." 
In contrast, he might characterize a male who exhibits the same pushy behavior as "aggressive."
People not only see what they expect to see, they also tend to overestimate how often they see it (Johnson & Mullen, 1994; Shavitt et al., 1999). 
Illusory correlation occurs when people estimate that they have encountered more confirmations of an association between social traits than they have actually seen. 
People also tend to underestimate the number of disconfirmations they have encountered, as illustrated by statements like "I've never met an honest lawyer."
Memory processes can contribute to confirmatory biases in person perception in a variety of ways. 
Often, individuals selectively recall facts that fit with their stereotypes (Fiske, 1998; Quinn, Macrae, & Bodenhausen, 2003). 
Evidence for such a tendency was found in a study by Cohen (1981). 
In this experiment, participants watched a videotape of a woman, described as either a waitress or a librarian, who engaged in a variety of activities, including listening to classical music, drinking beer, and watching TV. 
When asked to recall what the woman did during the filmed sequence, participants tended to remember activities consistent with their stereotypes of waitresses and librarians. 