9 Reluctant Entrepreneurs 
A businessman sitting next to us on a plane many years ago described how, when he returned to India in the mid-1970s after completing his MBA in the United States, his uncle had taken him out for a lesson in true entrepreneurship. 
It was early one morning when he and his uncle headed for the Bombay (as Mumbai was then called) Stock Exchange. 
But instead of going into the modern tower that houses the exchange, his uncle wanted him to observe four women who were sitting on the sidewalk, facing the road in front of the exchange. 
The aspiring businessman and his uncle stood for a few moments watching them. 
The women mostly did nothing. But occasionally, when the traffic stopped, they would get up, scrape something off the road, and put it in plastic carrier bags next to them, before returning to their seats. 
After this happened several times, the uncle asked him if he understood their business model. He confessed to be baffled. 
So the uncle had to explain: Every morning before dawn the women went to the beach, where they collected wet sea sand. They then laid it evenly on the street before the real traffic began. 
When the cars started driving over the sand, the heat from their wheels dried it. 
All they had to do then was occasionally to scrape off the top layer of sand, now dry. By nine or ten, they had a quantity of dry sand, which they brought back to the slum to sell in small packets made from discarded newspapers: The local women used the dry sand to scrub their dishes. 
This, the uncle reckoned, was true entrepreneurship: If you have very little, use your ingenuity to create something out of nothing.
Women from slums who manage to make a living, quite literally, from the wheels of Bombay¡¯s commerce epitomize the incredible spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship the poor often display. 
This book could easily be filled with stories of creativity and resilience among owners of small-scale enterprises. 
Such images have been a powerful motivation for the recent microfinance and ¡°social business¡± movement, which starts from the premise that the poor are natural-born entrepreneurs, and we can eradicate poverty by giving them the right environment and a little bit of help getting started. 
In the words of John Hatch, the CEO of FINCA, one of the largest microfinance institutions in the world: ¡°Give poor communities the opportunities, and get out of the way.¡±
Yet there are some perhaps surprising instances when, after you have gotten out of the way, the poor do not seem so ready to roll. 
Since 2007, we have been working with Al Amana, one of Morocco¡¯s largest MFIs, to evaluate the impact of access to microcredit in rural communities that had previously been completely excluded from formal financial sources. 
After about two years, it became evident that Al Amana was not getting as many clients in the villages as had been anticipated. 
Despite the lack of alternatives, less than one in six eligible families was interested in a loan. 
To try to understand why, we went with some Al Amana staff to interview a few families in a village called Hafret Ben Tayeb, where no one had borrowed. 
We were received by Allal Ben Sedan, the father of three sons and two daughters, all adults. 
He had four cows, one donkey, and eighty olive trees. 
One of his sons worked in the army; another tended to the animals; the third was mostly idle (his main activity was harvesting snails when they were in season). 
We asked Ben Sedan whether he would want to take a loan to buy some more cows, which his idle son could take care of. 
He explained that his field was too small ¡ª if he bought more cows they would have nowhere to graze. 
Before leaving, we asked him if there was anything else he could do with a loan. He replied, ¡°No, nothing. We have enough. 
We have cows, we sell them, we sell the olives. 
That is enough for our family.¡±
A few days later, we met Fouad Abdelmoumni, the founder (and then CEO) of Al Amana, a man of great warmth and intelligence, who in a previous life as an activist had spent years in jail as a political prisoner and was entirely devoted to improving the lives of the poor. 
We discussed the surprisingly low demand for microcredit. In particular, we went back to the story of Ben Sedan, who was convinced that he had no use for more money. 
Fouad drew up a clearly feasible business plan for him. 
He could take a loan, build a stable, and buy four young cows. They would not need to graze in a field: They could be fed in the stable. 
Within eight months, he could sell the cows for a hefty profit. 
Fouad was persuaded that if someone explained this to him, Ben Sedan would see the wisdom of this plan and take out a loan.
We were struck by the contrast between Fouad¡¯s enthusiasm and Ben Sedan¡¯s insistence that his family did not need anything. 
Yet Ben Sedan was not at all resigned to remaining poor: He was very proud of his son, who had been trained as a nurse and worked as a paramedic in the army. 
His son, he thought, had a real chance at a better life. 
So was Fouad right that Ben Sedan just needed to be led to a business plan? Or was Ben Sedan, who, after all, had been in the business of raising cows for most of his adult life, telling us something important?
Muhammad Yunus, founder of the world-famous Grameen Bank, often describes the poor as natural entrepreneurs. 
Combined with the late business guru C. K. Prahalad¡¯s exhortation to businessmen to focus more on what he called the ¡°bottom of the pyramid,¡± the idea of the entrepreneurial poor is helping to secure a space within the overall anti-poverty policy discourse where big business and high finance feel comfortable getting involved. 
The traditional strategies of public action are being supplemented by private actions, often taken by some of the leaders of the corporate world (for example, Pierre Omidyar of eBay), directed at helping the poor realize their true potential as entrepreneurs.
The basic premise of Yunus¡¯s view of the world, shared by many in the microfinance movement, is that everyone has a shot at being a successful entrepreneur. 
More specifically, there are two distinct reasons the poor may be particularly likely to find amazing opportunities. 
First, they haven¡¯t been given a chance, so their ideas are probably fresher and less likely to have been tried already. 
Second, the market so far has mostly ignored the bottom of the pyramid. 
As a result, it is argued, innovations that better the lives of the poor have to be the low-hanging fruit, and who better than the poor themselves to think of what they could be?
CAPITALISTS WITHOUT CAPITAL
Indeed, every self-respecting MFI has a Web site with a number of stories of successful microfinance clients who took advantage of an unusual opportunity to make a fortune. 
They are real: We have met several of those clients. 
In Guntur, in Andhra Pradesh, we met a client of Spandana who had built a very successful business collecting trash and sorting it. 
She started as a trash collector, which is pretty much as low as you can go in the Indian social and economic hierarchy. 
With her first loan from Spandana, she just paid back the loan she had from a moneylender, with its crippling interest rate. 
She knew that the businesses that bought the trash from her sorted it before selling it to recyclers¡ªthere would be bits of metal and tungsten from the filaments of used lightbulbs, plastics, organic matter for composting, and so forth, each of which went to a different recycler. 
With the breathing space that the first loan bought her, she decided to do the sorting herself to make some extra money. 
With her second loan and the savings from the first, she bought a cart, which helped her collect more trash, and because there was now more sorting to be done, she somehow managed to get her husband, who used to spend most of his time drinking, to start working with her. 
Together they were making significantly more money, and after receiving the third loan, they started buying trash from others. 
By the time we met her, she was at the helm of a large network of trash collectors, no longer a collector herself but an organizer of trash collection. 
Her husband, too, was working full-time by then: We saw him pounding away on a piece of metal, looking sober but a trifle glum.
MFIs advertise the stories of their most successful borrowers, but there are also entrepreneurs who succeed even when they have no access to microfinance. 
In 1982, Xu Aihua was one of the best middle-school students in her village, in the Shaoxing region of Zhejiang Province in China. 
Her parents were peasants and, like almost everyone else, had very little disposable cash. 
She was so bright, however, that the village decided to send her for a year to the local school of fashion design (whatever that meant, exactly, since everyone still wore Mao suits). 
The idea was that she would eventually take a leadership role in the local town and village enterprise that had just been set up (these were the early years of Chinese liberalization). 
But when she came back after her training, the local elders got cold feet¡ªshe was a girl, after all, not yet twenty. 
So she was sent unceremoniously home, jobless.
Xu Aihua had no intention of sitting idle. She decided that she had to do something, but her parents were too poor to help. 
So she borrowed a megaphone and went around the village offering to teach young girls how to make garments for a fee of 15 yuan ($13 USD PPP). 
She recruited 100 students, and with the money that she had just collected, she bought a secondhand sewing machine and some surplus fabric from the local state-owned factories, and started teaching. 
At the end of the course, she kept her eight best students and launched a business. 
The women would arrive every morning with their sewing machines on their back (they each got their parents to buy them one), then start cutting and sewing. 
They made uniforms for the local factory workers. 
At first they worked at Xu Aihua¡¯s home, but as the business expanded and Xu Aihua trained and hired more people, they moved to a building that she rented from the village government.
By 1991, she had saved so much from the profits of her business that she could afford to buy sixty automatic sewing machines for 54,000 yuan ($27,600 USD PPP). 
Her total fixed capital had grown more than a hundredfold in eight years. That is 80 percent per year. 
Even if we allow for an inflation rate of 10 percent per year, a real growth rate, net of inflation, of more than 70 percent a year is impressive. 
By this time, she was an established entrepreneur. 
Export contracts arrived soon after, and she now sells to Macy¡¯s, Benetton, JC Penney, and other major retailers. 
In 2008, she made her first investment in real estate of 20 million yuan ($4.4 million USD), because, as she says, she had some cash sitting around, and most other people did not.
Xu Aihua is not a typical case, of course: She was especially bright, and her village sent her to school. 
However, there is no dearth of success stories of entrepreneurship among the poor. And there is certainly no shortage of entrepreneurs. 
On average in our eighteen-country data set, 50 percent of the extremely poor in urban areas (those who live on under 99 cents a day) operate a nonagricultural business. 