When the first Saturn automobile rolled off the Spring Hill, Tennessee, assembly line in 1990, with departing GM Chairman Roger Smith at the wheel, the event was heralded as a landmark in both U.S. automotive manufacturing and union-management relations.
Here, indeed, was ¡°a different kind of company, a different kind of car.¡± 
The start-up plant had been nurtured under an unprecedented ¡°Memorandum of Agreement¡± that called a tentative truce between General Motors and the UAW. 
The car, with its double-overhead cam, 16-valve engine, was a step forward in American engineering. 
It had been manufactured with team-based processes, a radical departure from the assembly line production at other American automakers. 
It would be sold to the public with a no-price-hassle policy by sales teams trained to make car buying a celebration.
Two years later, Saturn would win the highest possible scores in mechanical reliability in independent consumer organization tests, and J.D. Powers would rank the car third in consumer satisfaction, trailing Infiniti and Lexus, the pricey Japanese imports, by a few points. 
While General Motors continued to lose money ($23.5 billion in 1992), Saturn Corp. began turning a profit three years after plant start-up. 
In 1997, Saturn was die only small car in the GM roster to be making money.
Like all success stories, many factors contributed to Saturn Corp.¡¯s achievements. 
Not the least of these (although often overlooked) is a distinctive risk and reward compensation plan, crafted jointly by union and management and designed to meet the needs of workers transported from urban centers nationwide to rural Tennessee. 
The pay system deserves a closer look because it shows how pay can be one motivating force in a total system of people and technology management.
It¡¯s impossible to understand why the Saturn pay system has proved so successful without looking at the history that gave rise to the distinctive union-management pact, the car itself, and the production system. 
The sidebar on page 52 describes the rudiments of Saturn's risk and reward compensation plan. 
The following discussion looks at how the system developed and offers an interpretation of why it works.
There would be no Saturn Corp., as we know it, had it not been for the crises that brought U.S automakers to their knees in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and for the visionary efforts that welded union and management interests into a single mission. 
The strength of that relationship was well documented in a recent Productivity Forum in New York City sponsored by the Work in America Institute. 
Mike Bennett, head of UAW Local 1853 at Saturn, and Dennis Finn, human resource advisor and a member of the Saturn Manufacturing Action Council, shared the podi-um. Finn introduced Bennett as ¡°the most courageous union leader I¡¯ve ever met¡± and credited his ability to ¡°carry the Saturn vision¡± as one key factor in the company¡¯s success. 
Bennett, in turn, emphasized the extent to which the union and management have joined forces. 
¡°We don¡¯t see the Saturn Corporation and the union as separate entities,¡± he said. ¡°We¡¯re one and the same.... 
We believe that having the union involved as a full partner in the decisionmaking process at all levels of the corporation is essential to the success of the corporation.¡± 
He went on to say that the definition of ¡°full partnership¡± includes union participation in all strategic decisions, including ''methods of production, pricing, and capital appropriation~just about everything?¡±
The words came easily in Bennett¡¯s low-key, matter-of-fact presentation, masking the complex issues, heated debates, and intense learning that evolved over two decades.
The 1980s were years of panic for U.S. automakers. 
True, the level of Japanese imports had been rising since 1965, but it seemed to cause no serious threat. 
Then, in 1973 OPEC sounded its wake up call. 
Prices at the gas pumps doubled and more than 625,000 Japanese small cars crossed the Pacific, a trend that would accelerate. 
In 1980 alone, more than 2 million Japanese imports found their way to the U.S. 
In that same year, U.S. automakers lost a combined total of $4.2 billion.
Japan¡¯s awesome achievements shocked America into a hyper awareness of quality (the work of W. Edwards Deming), the cost savings that could come from lean production techniques, and the importance of listening to customers. 
When Roger Smith became General Motors chairman in 1981, he killed the S-Car, Chevrolet¡¯s small car project. 
A year later, he encouraged the GM Technical Center to establish a ¡°skunk works¡± to explore the feasibility of a ¡°radically different¡± kind of small car~a concept with no name that eventually became Saturn.
At about the same time, Smith risked everything by going to bed with the enemy. The GM/Toyota joint venture, to become known as NUMMI, would provide the Japanese manufacturer with a stronger foothold in America but give GM the opportunity to learn invaluable lessons in production, quality, and inventory management.
Indeed, the early 1980s were a time for learning. 
Philosophical changes were in the wind, originating from the somewhat obscure concepts of ¡°socio-technical design¡±Ò»experiments in an English coal mine that suggested Western civilization had a lot to learn about managing the relationships between people and technology. 
Moreover, the theoretical folk were not afraid to dip their concepts in grease: 
The Volvo manufacturing plant in Sweden, with its team-based production systems, was proving it could roll out quality and quantity better than standard assembly lines. 
At the same time, executives from General Electric, among other U.S. manufacturers, were touting the successes and virtues of ¡°self-managed teams¡± at industry meetings and roundtables.
Together, these events¡ªfrom Japan, Sweden, and U.S. manufacturers outside the automotive industry, among many others¡ªproduced an era of high interest in teams, learning environments, lean production, and Deming-style quality, all given color and immediacy by the red ink spilling from Detroit balance sheets.
If a company¡¯s identity, like a person¡¯s, is formed from both genetics and environment, then the events in the 1980s constituted a new kind of DNA. 
The old automaker¡¯s DNA~formed from the principles of Frederick Taylor¡¯s scientific management, had produced assembly lines, armies of rote workers, and legions of experts in time-and-motion studies. 
A forced marriage with the labor movement had produced an awkward, unproductive offspring with a split personality~ the U.S. auto industry from the 1950s onward.
If this identity, in turn, were married to a bride with idealistic notions about learning environments and teamwork, what would the offspring look like? It was the job of the General Motors Technical Center to find out.
The Force of Ninety-Nine 
As the GM tech center focused on engineering : 0 issues, it also chartered an entity known as the : a Saturn Study Center. 
The center¡¯s mission, stated succinctly, was ¡°to identify and recommend the best approaches to integrate people and technology to competitively manufacture small cars in the United States.¡±
From this came what was called the ¡°Group of 99,¡± which consisted of 99 individuals, approximately half from the union, half from management, selected from across the country. 
The group was to serve as a think tank and, with Smidi¡¯s blessing, members were to do whatever : they had to do, spend what they had to spend, i and go where they wanted to go, to fulfill the center's mission.
GM's tech center established the joint labor-management ¡°Group of 99¡± as a think tank
In one of the early histories of the company, In the Rings of Saturn (Oxford University Press, 1994), Joe Sherman describes the group as ¡°one of those fanciful, costly, enlightening experiments : that only a company with the resources of : General Motors could pull off.¡± 
The group traveled widely, visited high performance plants in Sweden, Japan, and the U.S., talked to academics, attended seminars, and the like. 
It was a massive study effort, and it laid the theoretical foundation for both manufacturing operations and labor relations.
A six-person task force within the Group of 99 was charged with the responsibility of putting the concepts on paper. 
From this group came the landmark 1,600-word ¡°Memorandum of Agreement¡± that would serve as a de facto Constitution¡ªperhaps Declaration of Interdependence would be a better term for the new plant. 
The memorandum read in part:
We believe that all people want to be involved in decisions that affect them, care about their jobs and each other, take pride in themselves and in their contributions, and want to share in the success of their efforts. 
The memorandum, however, did not resolve the issue of who would be hired. 
It would make a great deal of sense to hire local labor, at least in part. 
This would cast GM as a good citizen willing to bring new vitality to the local economy. 
Moreover, experience demonstrated that greenfield plants using workers who had never been ¡°corrupted¡± by a union philosophy would have a greater chance of success. 
But GM was facing layoffs nationwide, and when the UAW ratified the Memorandum, it demanded 100% union labor. 
This, then, meant moving 5,000 production workers from around the country to rural Tennessee.
The Memorandum also specified that base pay would be lower than the national average and laid the foundation for the risk and reward system described in the sidebar. 
The memo specified that 20% of pay would be at risk. Subsequent negotiations, however, led to a phase-in of the 20% over a period of time.
Why It Worked
Speaking at the Work in America Forum, Mike Bennett credited the Memorandum as the foundation for Saturn¡¯s success and the reason the corporation is making money today. 
¡°It provided a general outline of what the structure [of the work arrangement] would look like. 
It¡¯s philosophical...it talks about the relationship between customers, employees, and the corporation, and it lays out goals in terms of quality, cost, and customers.¡± 
The most controversial aspect of the Memorandum, Bennett said, was that it broke the decades-old pattern of collective bargaining and helped put an end to the ¡°us versus them¡± attitude.
At the time the Memorandum was drafted in 1985, there was no car, no plant to manufacture it in, and no dealers to sell it. 
Everything had to be built from scratch. 
Or, as Bennett put it, ¡°We had to learn our way into everything.¡±
Although it would be presumptuous to read the minds of the hundreds of individuals who worked to forge the Memorandum and build the Saturn system, we can begin to see much of the sense of the pattern.
Faced with fierce price competition in the small car market, GM's decision to start the plant in a rural setting played GM as a responsible corporate citizen at the same time that it promised to lower the labor cost per car. 
Given the depressed economy in Tennessee, GM didn¡¯t need to pay standard union rate.
At the Work in America Forum, Dennis Finn claimed that ¡°we never intended to pay people less, but rather to incent them more.¡± 
One cannot help wondering, however, if the stipulation of ¡°20% of pay at risk¡± didn¡¯t provide a comforting safety net to GM corporate management.
For the 5,000 production workers moving to rural Tennessee, there were certainly ambiguous feelings. 
On the one hand, there was the excitement of starting a new life with greater job security. 
On the other hand, they would be living in a depressed area, with poor schools and few public amenities, and earning substantially less money.
But consider these mixed feelings in the context of a vision that included not only making a new kind of car but the possibility of earning more~much more, $10,000 a year more¡ªthan the average GM worker.
Also, the decision to phase in the full 20% at risk over the course of a rather long period of time suggests an auspicious compromise that played well with the psychology of the move. 