Economists¡¯ attitude to trading blocs - whether they be common markets or regional free trade areas (FTAs)-has been ambivalent.
This follows from the classical case for free trade, as modified by the modern theory of trade and welfare (see Corden, 1974).
This states in its static version that free trade is in the interest of each country because it expands its feasible set of consumption possibilities by providing, in effect, an indirect technology for transforming domestic resources into the goods and services which yield current and future utility to consumers.
The dynamic version incorporates investment in line with a country¡¯s comparative advantages, which minimizes the present value of the resource costs of its future demand.
The modem theory, moreover, does not necessitate a commitment to laissez-faire.
Except for the so-called optimum tariff argument (when a country can influence its terms of trade), most arguments for protection can be shown to be arguments to deal with so-called domestic distortions in the working of the price mechanism.
They require domestic public interventions, but not in foreign trade.
From this perspective as the relevance of the optimum tariff argument is likely to be limited (see below) - the ideal policy for each and every country is unilaterally to adopt free trade in its own self-interest, as Britain did after the repeal of the Corn Laws.
The case for trading blocs must therefore at best be a second best one.
Such a case is ultimately based on the judgement that irrespective of the theoretical case in favour of unilateral free trade, most countries are mercantilist, looking upon foreign trade as a zero-sum game.
The negotiating mechanisms underlying the promotion of multilateral free trade even under GATT are implicitly mercantilist.
Mercantilists view trade as a war, and the various GATT rounds with their ¡®concessions¡¯ to economic virtue are like multilateral disarmament.
If in this contest some countries decide to disarm amongst themselves, and that on balance does not hurt others (that is if the arrangements are net trade creating), then the resulting trading bloc is to be blessed.
This in essence is the rationale of GATT¡¯s article XXlV allowing exceptions to its MFN rule and the principle of non-discrimination which is the cornerstone of the multilateral trading system constructed under its auspices since the Second World War.
Most economists agree that the net effects of the two major trading blocs which are currently emerging - the European Community (EC) after the completion of the Single Market, and the North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA)- are likely to be net trade creating (see, e.g., Krueger, 1992a). But there are two remaining and serious worries.
The first is that rather than being a step towards multilateral free trade, such blocs will lead to a retrogression.
This arises from the new interest groups created who benefit from the trade diversion which accompanies any discriminatory preferential trading arrangement.
They will oppose any further movement to an open multilateral trading system.
The second is that the concentration of scarce political capital and energy on promoting regional trading blocs will divert the attention of traditional supporters of the global system towards these second best schemes.
Further, given the inevitable trade frictions that will arise between large regional trading blocs - with those left outside, such as the East Asian newly industrializing countries (NICs) and Japan trying to form their own defensive blocs-the whole multilateral trading system built up since the Second World War could unravel.
In this context it is the US endorsement of regionalism which is most worrying.
As Wolf notes: ¡®The shift in US thinking towards FTAs, and more generally toward bilateralism as a principle, rather than a shamefaced expedient, is momentous.
As the progenitor and most enthusiastic upholder of the unconditional MFN principle, the US may well doom the GATT system in its present form by this defection¡¯ (Wolf, 1989, p. 93).
But is GATT, particularly its largest Uruguay Round, worth saving?
There have been a considerable number of academic, and other, commentaries about the defects of GATT, from which it has been ably defended by Bhagwati (1991).
More serious is the danger of a trade war between rival trading blocs if the Uruguay Round collapses.
The World Bank¡¯s World Development Report 1991, estimated that this could lead to a loss of 3-4 per cent of world output.
One great paradox of the 1980s is that, whereas developing countries are finally coming around to accepting the economists¡¯ case for the unilateral implementation of free trade, the developed countries, which in the past have been the major votaries of multilateral free trade, have been gradually turning their backs on their professed principles through various forms of creeping administrative protection such as non-tariff barriers like voluntary export restraints (VERs) and anti-dumping actions.
Stoeckel et al. (1990) have estimated on the basis of their world trade model that a 50 per cent reduction in these non-tariff barriers and in the much lower current tariff barriers would result in an increase of world income of over 5 per cent.
This is the prize offered by multilateral trade liberalization.
But, instead, the current prospect is of a strengthening of regional trading blocs at the expense of the multilateral trading system (see Lawrence and Schultze, 1990; Schott 1989).
This growing impatience with the multilateral trading system is unlikely to lead to the 1930s-type collapse of the world trading system as many observers fear.
A more likely outcome is by analogy with the gradual erosion of the first liberal trading order established in the second half of the nineteenth century.
The great Age of Reform began with the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, and culminated in Gladstone¡¯s 1860 Budget, the first of a series which unilaterally freed the UK¡¯s trade.
Subsequently, with the Cobden-Chevalier Treaty of 1860, and a string of other tariff treaties, all of which for the first time incorporated the MFN principle, the ¡®dream of universal free trade appeared to be approaching reality¡¯ (Kenwoodand Lougheed, 1971, p.76).
The peak of this liberal free trade order was probably 1870.
From 1880 onwards there was a revival of protectionism.
During this free trade period, along with the international integration that ensued there was also a movement towards national integration through the formation of the Zollverein in Germany in 1834, and the unification of Italy in 1861.
World trade boomed, growing at an annual rate of over 4 per cent per annum between 1850-70 (see Rogowski, 1989, p.22).
Similarly in the quarter century after the Second World War, the second great liberal economic order was created under American leadership through successive multilateral GATT trade rounds.
Simultaneously,the movement towards European integration parallelled the movement towards national integration in the nineteenth century.
In the peak period of this second Golden Age, world trade grew at an annual average rate of about 9 per cent (Rogowski, 1989, p.89) -twice as fast as in the nineteenth century¡¯s Golden Age.
The OECD countries and those developing countries which adopted relatively outward-oriented trade policies saw dramatic increases in their standards of living.
The major problem it seemed was to convince the remaining developing countries to reverse their inward orientation- a task on which I have spent much of my professional career.
Just as they seem to be coming around, and with the unexpected collapse of the autarkic system of central planning in communist countries, leading to their rushing to be integrated with the world economy, another universal free trade order seemed to be on the cards.
But as in the 1880s, a gradual slide towards protectionism gained momentum in the 1980s.
However, there were two major differences.
Whereas the UK, which had led the nineteenth-century march to free trade, remained constant to its principles, it was the then newly industrializing countries- the US, Germany and France which revived protectionism.
Today it is the NICs -and those who aspire to this status - who are converts to free trade, whilst it is Europe and the US - the leaders of the post-war free trade movement - who are turning inwards.
Secondly, unlike the nineteenth century where the instrument of protection was the tariff, today¡¯s new protectionists increasingly use various forms of administrative protection whose common feature is a quota.
This is more damaging both to their and world economic welfare, as quotas on foreign trade- unlike tariffs - break the link between domestic and foreign prices, and effectively prevent specialization according to a country¡¯s emerging comparative advantage, on which its long-run prosperity ultimately depends.
The current movement towards regional trading blocs is a culmination of this trend towards what is called ¡®managed¡¯ trade.
It could be argued that the trading blocs being formed, in particular the bilateral free trade agreements currently in favour in the US, are merely replicating the commercial treaties the UK signed to promote free trade in the nineteenth century.
But there is an important difference. Whereas the nineteenth century treaties all embodied the MFN clause and hence were non-discriminatory, the current FTAs are based on bilateral reciprocity, are discriminatory and go against the GATT MFN rule.
To protect the preferences granted to the partners they set out complex rules of origin to prevent non-members shipping goods to partners with high external trade barriers through those with lower ones. (See Krueger, 1992b for an analysis of the protectionist content of rules of origin in FTAs). Though it is possible to have FTAs which are GATT plus, and are on a conditional MFN basis
(to avoid the problem of ¡®free riders¡¯ with the unconditional MFN rule, which has exercised many politicians-see Schott 1989), the purpose of the FTA route being pursued by the US as Krueger (1989) notes is that they ¡®at best provide assurances to American trading partners that protectionism will go no further with them¡¯ (p.197).
So why, given the unprecedented prosperity that the multilateral liberal international economic order has delivered to its participants, are the major architects of the order turning their backs on it?
There is a complex web of reasons, and only a few can be highlighted.
The first is that, ¡®historically, FTAs have been the economic policy of the uncompetitive and the foreign policy of the weak. The shift of the UK to a fullblown policy of imperial preferences in the 1930s was an admission of both political and economic decline.
Equally, the discriminatory policies of the EC have their roots not only in fear of competition (initially from the US, now from the Far East), but also in the limited number of instruments of foreign policy available to it.
Should one interpret the movement of the US in the 1980s toward a trade policy based more on discrimination as a tacit admission of its relative economic and political decline?
The answer, unfortunately, is ¡°yes¡±¡¯ (Wolf, 1989, p.92).
The second is that, historically, largely due to the interactions of its factor endowments and mass democracy, the US is naturally protectionist.
From the Stolper-Samuelson theorem we would expect protection to be in the interest of the scarce factor of production.
In the US this is unskilled and semi-skilled labour.
In a mass democracy, however, labour is likely to have a disproportionate influence on the polity, if for no other reason that raw labour is the factor of production most evenly distributed amongst the voting public, and hence its interest will tend to be reflected in public policy.
The surprising fact therefore is not the US¡¯s current lurch to protectionism, but the nearly three decades after the Second World War when it was a free trader (see Rogowski, 1989).
The third reason is that, with the integration of world capital markets, trade imbalances are now the other side of the coin of imbalances on the capital account.
As is well known, the US trade deficit is the mirror image of the surplus on its capital account, which in turn reflects the imbalance between domestic investment and savings.