The Medium Is the Metaphor
At different times in our history, different cities have been the focal point of a radiating American spirit. 
In the late eighteenth century, for example, Boston was the center of a political radicalism that ignited a shot heard round the world！a shot that could not have been fired any other place but the suburbs of Boston. 
At its report, all Americans, including Virginians, became Bostonians at heart.
In the mid-nineteenth century, New York became the symbol of the idea of a melting-pot America！or at least a non-English one ！as the wretched refuse from all over the world disembarked at Ellis Island and spread over the land their strange languages and even stranger ways. 
In the early twentieth century, Chicago, the city of big shoulders and heavy winds, came to symbolize the industrial energy and dynamism of America.
If there is a statue of a hog butcher somewhere in Chicago, then it stands as a reminder of the time when America was railroads, cattle, steel mills and entrepreneurial adventures. 
If there is no such statue, there ought to be, just as there is a statue of a Minute Man to recall the Age of Boston, as the Statue of Liberty recalls the Age of New York.
Today, we must look to the city of Las Vegas, Nevada, as a metaphor of our national character and aspiration, its symbol a thirty-foot-high cardboard picture of a slot machine and a chorus girl. 
For Las Vegas is a city entirely devoted to the idea of entertainment, and as such proclaims the spirit of a culture in which all public discourse increasingly takes the form of entertainment. 
Our politics, religion, news, athletics, education and commerce have been transformed into congenial adjuncts of show business, largely without protest or even much popular notice. The result is that we are a people on the verge of amusing ourselves to death.
As I write, the President of the United States is a former Hollywood movie actor. 
One of his principal challengers in 1984 was once a featured player on television's most glamorous show of the 1960's, that is to say, an astronaut. 
Naturally, a movie has been made about his extraterrestrial adventure. 
Meanwhile, former President Richard Nixon, who once claimed he lost an election because he was sabotaged by make-up men, has offered Senator Edward Kennedy advice on how to make a serious run for the presidency: lose twenty pounds. 
Although the Constitution makes no mention of it, it would appear that fat people are now effectively excluded from running for high political office. 
Probably bald people as well. Almost certainly those whose looks are not significantly enhanced by the cosmetician's art. 
Indeed, we may have reached the point where cosmetics has replaced ideology as the field of expertise over which a politician must have competent control.
America's journalists, i.e., television newscasters, have not missed the point. 
Most spend more time with their hair dryers than with their scripts, with the result that they comprise the most glamorous group of people this side of Las Vegas. 
Although the Federal Communications Act makes no mention of it, those without camera appeal are excluded from addressing the public about what is called "the news of the day." Those with camera appeal can command salaries exceeding one million dollars a year.
American businessmen discovered, long before the rest of us, that the quality and usefulness of their goods are subordinate to the artifice of their display; 
that, in fact, half the principles of capitalism as praised by Adam Smith or condemned by Karl Marx are irrelevant. 
Even the Japanese, who are said to make better cars than the Americans, know that economics is less a science than a performing art, as Toyota's yearly advertising budget confirms.
Not long ago, I saw Billy Graham join with Shecky Green, Red Buttons, Dionne Warwick, Milton Berle and other theologians in a tribute to George Bums, who was celebrating himself for surviving eighty years in show business. 
The Reverend Graham exchanged one-liners with Bums about making preparations for Eternity. 
Although the Bible makes no mention of it, the Reverend Graham assured the audience that God loves those who make people laugh. 
It was an honest mistake. He merely mistook NBC for God.
Ruth Westheimer is a psychologist who has a popular radio program and a nightclub act in which she informs her audiences about sex in all of its infinite variety and in language once reserved for the bedroom and street corners. 
She is almost as entertaining as the Reverend Billy Graham, and has been quoted as saying, "I don't start out to be funny. But if it comes out that way, I use it.
 If they call me an entertainer, I say that's great. When a professor teaches with a sense of humor, people walk away remembering."
She did not say what they remember or of what use their remembering is. But she has a point: It's great to be an entertainer. 
Indeed, in America God favors all those who possess both a talent and a format to amuse, whether they be preachers, athletes, entrepreneurs, politicians, teachers or journalists. 
In America, the least amusing people are its professional entertainers.
Culture watchers and worriers！those of the type who read books like this one！will know that the examples above are not aberrations but, in fact, cliches. 
There is no shortage of critics who have observed and recorded the dissolution of public discourse in America and its conversion into the arts of show business. 
But most of them, I believe, have barely begun to tell the story of the origin and meaning of this descent into a vast triviality. 
Those who have written vigorously on the matter tell us, for example, that what is happening is the residue of an exhausted capitalism; or, on the contrary, that it is the tasteless fruit of the maturing of capitalism; or that it is the neurotic aftermath of the Age of Freud; or the retribution of our allowing God to perish; or that it all comes from the old stand-bys, greed and ambition.
I have attended carefully to these explanations, and I do not say there is nothing to learn from them. 
Marxists, Freudians, Levi-Straussians, even Creation Scientists are not to be taken lightly. 
And, in any case, I should be very surprised if the story I have to tell is anywhere near the whole truth. 
We are all, as Huxley says someplace, Great Abbreviators, meaning that none of us has the wit to know the whole truth, the time to tell it if we believed we did, or an audience so gullible as to accept it. 
But you will find an argument here that presumes a clearer grasp of the matter than many that have come before. 
Its value, such as it is, resides in the directness of its perspective, which has its origins in observations made 2,300 years ago by Plato.
It is an argument that fixes its attention on the forms of human conversation, and postulates that how we are obliged to conduct such conversations will have the strongest possible influence on what ideas we can conveniently express. And what ideas are convenient to express inevitably become the important content of a culture.
I use the word "conversation" metaphorically to refer not only to speech but to all techniques and technologies that permit people of a particular culture to exchange messages. 
In this sense, all culture is a conversation or, more precisely, a corporation of conversations, conducted in a variety of symbolic modes. 
Our attention here is on how forms of public discourse regulate and even dictate what kind of content can issue from such forms.
To take a simple example of what this means, consider the primitive technology of smoke signals. 
While I do not know exactly what content was once carried in the smoke signals of American Indians, I can safely guess that it did not include philosophical argument. 
Puffs of smoke are insufficiently complex to express ideas on the nature of existence, and even if they were not, a Cherokee philosopher would run short of either wood or blankets long before he reached his second axiom. 
You cannot use smoke to do philosophy. Its form excludes the content.
To take an example closer to home: As I suggested earlier, it is implausible to imagine that anyone like our twenty-seventh President, the multi-chinned, three-hundred-pound William Howard Taft, could be put forward as a presidential candidate in today's world. 
The shape of a man's body is largely irrelevant to the shape of his ideas when he is addressing a public in writing or on the radio or, for that matter, in smoke signals. But it is quite relevant on television. 
The grossness of a three-hundred-pound image, even a talking one, would easily overwhelm any logical or spiritual subtleties conveyed by speech.
For on television, discourse is conducted largely through visual imagery, which is to say that television gives us a conversation in images, not words. 
The emergence of the image-manager in the political arena and the concomitant decline of the speech writer attest to the fact that television demands a different kind of content from other media. 
You cannot do political philosophy on television. Its form works against the content.
To give still another example, one of more complexity: The information, the content, or, if you will, the "stuff" that makes up what is called "the news of the day" did not exist！could not exist！in a world that lacked the media to give it expression. 
I do not mean that things like fires, wars, murders and love affairs did not, ever and always, happen in places all over the world. 
I mean that lacking a technology to advertise them, people could not attend to them, could not include them in their daily business. 
Such information simply could not exist as part of the content of culture.
This idea！that there is a content called "the news of the day"！was entirely created by the telegraph (and since amplified by newer media), which made it possible to move decontextualized information over vast spaces at incredible speed. 
The news of the day is a figment of our technological imagination. It is, quite precisely, a media event. 
We attend to fragments of events from all over the world because we have multiple media whose forms are well suited to fragmented conversation. 
Cultures without speed-of-light media！let us say, cultures in which smoke signals are the most efficient space-conquering tool available！ do not have news of the day. 
Without a medium to create its form, the news of the day does not exist.
To say it, then, as plainly as I can, this book is an inquiry into and a lamentation about the most significant American cultural fact of the second half of the twentieth century: the decline of the Age of Typography and the ascendancy of the Age of Television. 
This change-over has dramatically and irreversibly shifted the content and meaning of public discourse, since two media so vastly different cannot accommodate the same ideas. 
As the influence of print wanes, the content of politics, religion, education, and anything else that comprises public business must change and be recast in terms that are most suitable to television.
If all of this sounds suspiciously like Marshall McLuhan's aphorism, the medium is the message, I will not disavow the association (although it is fashionable to do so among respectable scholars who, were it not for McLuhan, would today be mute). 
I met McLuhan thirty years ago when I was a graduate student and he an unknown English professor. 
I believed then, as I believe now, that he spoke in the tradition of Orwell and Huxley！that is, as a prophesier, and I have remained steadfast to his teaching that the clearest way to see through a culture is to attend to its tools for conversation. 