The Evolution of Culture
Edward Burnett Tylor (1832-1917) is considered the founding father of British anthropology. 
Tylor was the first professor of anthropology at Oxford; he was active in establishing anthropological associations and institutions; and his ideas contributed to the intellectual debates of the late nineteenth century sparked by Darwin's On the Origin of Species.
His friend A. C. Haddon wrote that Tylor's books, ¡°while replete with vast erudition, are so suggestive and graced by such quiet humour that they have become ¡®classics,' and have profoundly influenced modern thought. 
From their first appearance it was recognized that a mastermind was guiding the destinies of the nascent science¡±(1910: 159). 
When a contemporary, the religious scholar Max Muller, dubbed anthropology ¡°Mr. Tylor's science,¡± it was a recognition of Tylor's impact on the definition of a scholarly field.
Central to Tylor's contribution was his definition of culture: ¡°Culture or Civilization, taken in its wide ethnographic sense, is that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of society¡± (1958: 1). 
In these opening lines of his major work, Primitive Culture, Tylor first defined culture in ¡°its modern technical or anthropological meaning¡± (Kroeber and Kluckhohn 1952: 9; compare Stocking 1963).
It is a definition of culture that Bohannan and Glazer note ¡°is the only one most anthropologists can quote correctly, and the one they fall back on when others prove too cumbersome¡± (1988: 62).
Yet one of his most careful modern readers, George W. Stocking Jr., writes, ¡°To judge by current textbooks, Tylor has little to say to anthropology today¡± (1968: 176). 
Contending that many of his later readers simply misunderstood his concept of culture (Stocking 1963), Stocking concludes that Tylor was not ¡°one of the major investors in the general intellectual capital of the modern human sciences,¡± dwarfed by figures like Marx, Freud, Weber, or Durkheim (1987: 301-302).
Ironically, Tylor's lasting influence was greater on American anthropology than on subsequent British social anthropology (see, for example, Evans-Pritchard's [1981: 91-94] curiously curt discussion of his eminent predecessor at Oxford). 
In contrast, an American anthropologist like Robert Lowie (1937) lauded Tylor as a careful scholar with a ¡°serene willingness to weigh evidence.¡± 
Varying assessments of Tylor and his American contemporary, Lewis Henry Morgan, led Meyer Fortes (1969) to suggest that Morgan gave birth to British social anthropology, while the very British Tylor fathered American cultural anthropology.
How do we make sense of such contradictory assessments? 
Why was Tylor so influential in his time? 
What is the lasting value of his ideas?
Background
Tylor's family were Quakers, then a religious minority, though one firmly part of the British middle class. 
Tylor's religion precluded education at Oxford or Cambridge, which only granted degrees to members of the Church of England. 
Tylor was educated in Quaker schools before joining the family foundry business at the age of sixteen. 
Tylor's Quaker upbringing also led to an agnosticism that tempered his studies of the origins of religion. 
Ackerman observes that Tylor's agnosticism led him to approach religions as intellectual systems rather than expressions of belief, noting that Tylor ¡°cared more about creed than consolation¡± (1987: 77).
In his early twenties, Tylor exhibited preliminary symptoms of tuberculosis, and ¡°secure of a modest competency¡± in Marett's (1936: 13) discreet phrase, Tylor left the family business and traveled to warmer latitudes to regain his health. 
In Cuba he met Henry Christy, a British businessman and avid archaeologist, and the two set off for a four-month journey through Mexico described in Tylor's first book, Anahuac: Or, Mexico and the Mexicans, Ancient and Modern (1861). 
Anahuac is a travelogue informed by wide reading and crafted with an eye for telling detail and an ear for dialogue.
From the port of Veracruz, Tylor and Christy traveled inland by stagecoach to Mexico City with frequent stops as the archaeologist Christy searched roadside gullies for obsidian arrowheads (Tylor 1861: 35). 
The travelers visited archaeological sites like Teotihuacan and Cholula, searched for potsherds in newly plowed fields, and compared the artifacts of Mexico with recent finds from Europe. 
But most of Anahuac describes modern, not ancient, Mexico. 
Tylor and Christy toured sugar plantations, textile factories, pulque shops, and haciendas. 
He describes Mexico's political instability and poverty. Tylor's anticlerical upbringing erupts in a rash of diatribes against the Catholic Church. 
His criticisms are so stinging that Tylor himself admits, ¡°It seems hard to be always attacking the Roman Catholic clergy,¡± but then proceeds to blame priests for the ¡°doleful ignorance¡± and poverty of the population (1861: 126). 
In Anahuac Tylor shows himself as an informed and observant, though not unprejudiced, writer.
Over the next four years, Tylor matured into a more serious student of human culture. 
In 1865 he published Researches into the Early History of Mankind and the Development of Civilization, which outlined the analytical themes that he developed the rest of his life. 
¡°The early Culture History of Mankind,¡± Tylor wrote, ¡°is capable of being treated as an Inductive Science, by collecting and grouping facts¡± (1964: 137).
Tylor sifted through missionaries' accounts, explorers' journals, ancient texts, and ethnological reports to search for similarities in human cultures. 
¡°When similar arts, customs, beliefs or legends are found in several distant regions, among peoples not known to be of the same stock,¡± Tylor asked, ¡°how is this similarity to be accounted for?¡± (1964: 3). 
Essentially there are two possible explanations: the similarity is either the result of parallel invention¡ª¡°the like working of men's minds under like conditions¡± (1964: 3)¡ªor it is evidence of contacts¡ªdirect or indirect, contemporary or historical¡ªbetween the societies and the consequent diffusion of cultural knowledge.
Tylor's consideration of diffusion marks his early work, yet Stocking notes that Tylor increasingly emphasized the importance of evolution over diffusion or parallel invention (1963: 788). 
Sixteen years later, the scholar would conceive of his textbook Anthropology as ¡°a series of chapters demonstrating the fact and course of progression in various areas of life,¡± almost exclusively emphasizing evolution (Stocking 1982: 79).
Evolution and progress were important themes even in Tylor's first serious ethnological book. 
Nearly half of Researches into the Early History of Mankind considers the evolution of language and symbols. 
Although admitting that there is ¡°no evidence of man ever having lived in society without use of spoken language,¡± Ty-lor describes certain societies with ¡°a speech so imperfect that even if talking of ordinary matters they have to eke it out by gestures.¡± 
Weighing alternate hypotheses, he suggests that such societies either are ¡°the strongest case of degeneration known in the history of the human race or supply a telling argument that the gesture-language is part of the original utterance of mankind¡± (Tylor 1964: 62-64).
In his first serious anthropological book, Tylor sketches a handful of themes he will develop in later work: the interpretation of myth, native rationales of dreams, and the logic of sympathetic magic, among others. 
Researches also contains his initial methodological musings about how to document the evolution of human society (see, for example, Tylor 1964: 236-241).
Researches into the Early History of Mankind and the Development of Civilization was published by John Murray and Sons, publishers of the most important scientific writings of the nineteenth century, including Lyell's Principles of Geology and Darwin's On the Origin of Species. 
It was a measure of Tylor's growing status in the scientific community. 
By the late 1860s, Tylor ¡°had climbed into the scientific establishment,¡± Joan Leopold writes (1980), becoming the friend of Alfred Russel Wallace, Thomas Henry Huxley, and other eminent Victorians; publishing articles and reviews in major periodicals; and giving public lectures. 
Tylor's achievement was marked by his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1871 and the publication of Primitive Culture.
Primitive Culture
In Primitive Culture Tylor sets out to reconstruct the history of human culture and immediately faces a major problem: How can humanity's prehistoric, unwritten history be known? 
Tylor closely followed contemporary archaeological discoveries of stone tools and extinct mammals in Great Britain and France, but fragments of bone and stone were not enough to reconstruct the ¡°complex whole¡± of culture or civilization. 
And so Tylor crafted his reconstruction on two principles: uniformitarianism and the concept of survivals.
The condition of culture among the various societies of mankind, insofar as it is capable of being investigated on general principles, is a subject apt for the study of laws of human thought and action. 
On the one hand, the uniformity which so largely pervades civilization may be ascribed, in great measure, to the uniform action of uniform causes: while on the other hand its various grades may be regarded as stages of development or evolution, each the outcome of previous history, and about to do its proper part in shaping the history of the future. (Tylor 1958: 1)
Uniformitarianism was derived from Charles Lyell's multivolume Principles of Geology (1830-1833). 
Lyell argued that the geological processes observable today¡ªerosion, sedimentation, and so on¡ªwere the same processes that shaped the earth in the past rather than spectacular, unique catastrophes like Noah's Flood. 
Observations of modern processes allowed for reconstructing the history of the earth because the same geological processes were at work then as now.
This was also true for culture, Tylor argued, because culture was created by universally similar human minds and governed by the same basic laws of cognition. 
¡°Surveyed in a broad view,¡± Tylor writes, the character and habit of mankind at once display that similarity and consistency which led the Italian proverb-maker to declare ¡°all the world is one country.¡± . . . 
To general likeness in human nature on the one hand, and to general likeness in the circumstances of life on the other, this similarity and consistency may no doubt be traced, and they may be studied with especial fitness comparing races near the same grade of civilization. (1958 : 6)
Setting aside for the moment the issue of ¡°grade of civilization,¡± Tylor's key point is that the processes of culture are similar for all people, regardless of where or when they lived, because human minds are similar (Tylor 1958: 159). 
This is the central logic of Tylor's uniformitarianism: culture or civilization consists of knowledge, beliefs, art, morals, customs, and other mental constructs; since human mental processes are universal, human societies have developed culture along similar trajectories, characterized by progress and expressed in the evolution of culture.
This has three implications. 
First, race does not explain cultural differences. 
Believing that it was ¡°possible and desirable to eliminate considerations of hereditary varieties or races of man,¡± Tylor contended his study demonstrated ¡°that stages of culture may be compared without taking into account how far tribes who use the same implement, follow the same custom, or believe the same myth, may differ in their bodily configuration and the colour of their skin and hair¡± (1958: 7). 
Rather, if two societies have analogous cultural traits (pottery or monotheism or stock markets), it is because either (1) the trait has diffused from one society to another, or (2) because independent inventions have developed due to the similarly constructed human minds encountering similar situations.
Second, it means that societies with similar cultural traits may represent analogous stages in the development of human culture. 
Citing Samuel Johnson's fairly predictable insult ¡°one set of savages is like another,¡± Tylor surprisingly exclaims, ¡°How true a generalization this really is, any Ethnological Museum may show¡± (1958: 6). 
Tylor quickly explains that these similarities are most pronounced in the realm of technology¡ªthe tools for hunting, fishing, fire making, cooking, and so on¡ªalthough cross-cultural similarities also exist in mythology, kinship, and other aspects of social life.
Such parallels reflect similar stages of cultural development among existing societies and also allow us to reconstruct prehistoric societies. 
Since the laws of mind are uniform, the patterns of contemporary ¡°primitive¡± societies must be similar to those of extinct prehistoric peoples, a ¡°hypothetical primitive condition [that] corresponds in a considerable degree to that of modern savage tribes, who in spite of their difference and distance, have in common certain elements of civilization, which seem remains of an early state of the human race at large¡± (Tylor 1958: 21). 