Contradictory Judgments of the Revolution at Its Inception
Nothing is more apt to remind philosophers and statesmen of the need for modesty than the history of the French Revolution, for no event was greater or longer in the making or more fully prepared yet so little anticipated. 
Not even Frederick the Great, for all his genius, sensed what was coming. 
He was in contact with it yet failed to see it.
Indeed, his actions were in accord with the spirit of the Revolution before the fact. 
He was its precursor and, in a manner of speaking, its agent. Yet he did not see it looming on the horizon, and when at last it did show its face, the remarkable new features that would set it apart from a host of other revolutions initially went unnoticed.
Outside of France the Revolution aroused universal curiosity. 
It made people everywhere think that new times were coming and stirred vague hopes of change and reform, but no one yet suspected what it was to become. 
Princes and their ministers lacked even the shadowy forebodings that agitated the masses. 
At first they regarded the Revolution as one of those periodic maladies to which the constitutions of all nations are liable, whose only effect is to afford new opportunities to the policy of their neighbors. 
If by chance they hit upon the truth about the Revolution, they did so unwittingly. 
To be sure, the sovereigns of the various German states, meeting in Pillnitz in 1791, proclaimed that the danger that imperiled the French monarchy was common to all the old powers of Europe and that all were just as vulnerable as France. 
At bottom, however, they did not believe it. 
Secret documents from the period reveal that they viewed such declarations as cunning pretexts with which they masked their real intentions or colored them for the sake of the crowd.
The princes and ministers themselves were convinced that the French Revolution was but a fleeting, local incident and that the only serious challenge it posed was how best to take advantage of it. 
To that end, they hatched plans, prepared for action, and entered into secret alliances. 
They vied over how to divide the prospective prey, fell out with one another, found common ground. 
There was virtually no contingency for which they did not prepare, except what actually happened.
The English, who, thanks to their own history and long practice of political freedom had a better understanding of what was happening, recognized as through a thick veil that a great revolution was under way. 
But they could not make out its form, and the influence that it would soon exert on their own fate and the fate of the world remained hidden from them. 
Arthur Young, who was traveling in France on the eve of the Revolution and recognized its imminence, had so little inkling of its significance that he wondered whether the result might not be to increase privilege. 
"As to the nobility and clergy," he said, "if a revolution added anything to their scale, I think it would do more mischief than good."
Burke, whose mind was sharpened by the loathing that the Revolution inspired in him from its inception, was nevertheless hesitant at first about what to think. 
What he predicted initially was that France would be sapped of its strength by the Revolution and all but destroyed. 
"We may assume," he said, "that France's military might will be extinguished for some time to come, and that in the next generation men will echo the ancient dictum, Gallos quoque m belltsflorutsse audtvtmus" [We have heard it said that the Gauls, too, once excelled in war].
Judgment close to an event is no better than judgment from afar. 
In France, on the eve of the Revolution's outbreak, no one yet had a clear idea of what was about to happen. 
Only two of the innumerable grievance books indicate any apprehensiveness in regard to the people. 
What did arouse fear was the likelihood that the royal government, or "court," as it was still called, would retain the preponderance of power. 
What worried contemporaries was that the Estates General were weak and short-lived. 
There was fear that they would be vulnerable to violent intimidation. 
The nobility was particularly alarmed by this possibility. 
Any number of grievance books expressed the view that "the Swiss troops should swear an oath never to turn their weapons against the citizenry, even in case of riot or revolt." 
Leave the Estates General free to do their work, and all the abuses would be easily eliminated. 
Vast reforms were needed, but reform would be easy.
The Revolution nevertheless pursued its own course. 
The monster reared its head, and its novel and terrifying features were revealed. 
After destroying political institutions, it abolished civil institutions. 
First it changed laws, then mores, customs, and even language. 
Having shredded the fabric of government, it undermined the foundations of society and ultimately went after God himself. 
Then the Revolution spilled across French borders, employing previously unknown means, new tactics, and murderous maxims - "opinions in arms," as Pitt called them.
The ramparts of empires were swept away by an unprecedented force, which toppled thrones and rode roughshod over peoples, yet - wonder to behold! - simultaneously won them over to its cause. 
What the princes and statesmen of Europe had initially taken to be an unremarkable historical incident suddenly seemed a phenomenon so new and so different from anything that had ever happened before, yet so monstrous and incomprehensible, that the human mind could not grasp it.
Some thought that this unknown force, which seemed neither to require nourishment nor to brook opposition, which no one could stop, and which could not stop itself, would lead to the complete and final dissolution of human society. 
Some regarded it as a visible sign of the devil's influence. 
"The French Revolution has a satanic character," M. de Maistre said in 1797. 
By contrast, others saw in it a beneficent plan of God, whose wish was to alter the face of the world as well as of France, indeed to create a new man.
In any number of writers from this period, we find something of the religious terror that Salvianus experienced at the sight of the barbarians. 
Burke, making this idea his own, exclaimed: Deprived of the old Government, deprived in a manner of all Government, France, fallen as a Monarchy, to common speculators might have appeared more likely to be an object of pity or insult, according to the disposition of the circumjacent powers, than to be the scourge and terror of them all. 
But out of the tomb of the murdered Monarchy in France, has arisen a vast, tremendous, unformed spectre, in a far more terrific guise than any which ever yet have overpowered the imagination and subdued the fortitude of man. 
Going straight forward to its end, unappalled by peril, unchecked by remorse, despising all common maxims and all common means, that hideous phantom overpowered those who could not believe it was possible she could at all exist.
Was the event really as extraordinary as it seemed to contemporaries? 
Was it as unprecedented and as deeply disturbing as they imagined? 
What was its true meaning? 
What was its actual character? 
What were the enduring effects of this strange and terrifying Revolution?
What precisely did it destroy? 
What did it create?
The time has come to investigate these questions and answer them. 
I believe that we stand today at the precise point from which this great event can best be perceived and judged. 
We are far enough from the Revolution that the passions that once clouded the view of those who made it have waned, yet close enough to empathize with them and understand the spirit that led them to it. 
This will soon become more difficult, because great revolutions that succeed erase the causes that produced them and become incomprehensible by dint of their very success.
That the Fundamental and Final Purpose of the Revolution Was Not, as Some Have Thought, to Destroy Religious Authority and Weaken Political Authority.
One of the French Revolution's first acts was to attack the Church, and among the passions born of the event the first to be kindled and the last to be extinguished was the irreligious passion. 
Even after enthusiasm for liberty had vanished and the French were reduced to paying for tranquility with servitude, still they rebelled against religious authority. 
Napoleon, who had been able to vanquish the Revolution's liberal genius, tried in vain to tame its anti-Christian spirit. Even in our own time we find men who believe they can redeem their servility to the pettiest of officials by their insolence toward God and who, even as they have abandoned all that was freest, noblest, and proudest in the doctrines of the Revolution, still boast of remaining true to its spirit by rejecting religion.
Today, however, it is easy to see that the war on religion was merely an incidental aspect of the great Revolution, a salient yet transitory feature of its physiognomy, a temporary consequence of ideas, passions, and specific circumstances that preceded the Revolution and laid the groundwork for it, rather than of the revolutionary spirit itself.
Eighteenth-century philosophy is rightly regarded as one of the principal causes of the Revolution, and it is true that that philosophy was deeply irreligious. 
It is essential, however, to note that it consisted of two distinct and separable parts.
One part consisted of new or freshly revived opinions about social conditions and the principles of civil and political law, including, for example, the natural equality of human beings, the consequent abolition of all privileges of caste, class, and profession, popular sovereignty, the omnipotence of the social power, the uniformity of rules, and so on.
All these doctrines were not merely causes of the Revolution but also constituted its substance, so to speak. Among its achievements these were the most fundamental, the most durable, and the most true in the eyes of posterity.
For the rest, the eighteenth-century phtlosophes attacked the Church with a kind of fury.
They attacked its clergy, its hierarchy, its institutions, and its dogma, and, the better to demolish all these things, they sought to undermine the very foundations of Christianity itself.
But this aspect of eighteenth-century philosophy, being rooted in circumstances that the Revolution eliminated, was destined to vanish as they did and be buried beneath the Revolution's triumph.
I will add just a word to clarify my meaning for now, because I want to return to this important subject later: it was much less as religious doctrine than as political institution that Christianity aroused such fanatical hatred.
It did so not because priests claimed to govern the other world but because they were landowners, feudal lords, tithe collectors, and administrators in this one; not because the Church had no place in the new society that the people were about to institute but because it occupied the most privileged and powerful place in the old society, which was to be dashed to pieces.
Consider the way in which the passage of time has brought this truth to the fore and kept it in the limelight. 
As the political achievements of the Revolution have been consolidated, its antireligious efforts have come to naught. 
As the ancient political institutions that the Revolution attacked were utterly destroyed; as the powers, influences, and classes that were particularly odious to it were progressively crushed; and - ultimate sign of their defeat - as even the hatreds they had once inspired withered and the clergy separated itself from everything that had fallen along with it, one began to see a gradual restoration of the power of the Church and a reaffirmation of its influence over the minds of men.
Do not assume, moreover, that this phenomenon is peculiar to France. There is scarcely a Christian church anywhere in Europe that has not undergone a revival since the French Revolution.