ON JUDICIAL POWER IN THE UNITED STATES AND ITS ACTION ON POLITICAL SOCIETY
The Anglo-Americans have preserved in the judicial power all the characteristics that distinguish it among other peoples.
Nevertheless, they have made of it a great political power.
How. How the judicial system of the Anglo-Americans differs from all others.
Why American judges have the right to declare laws unconstitutional.
How American judges use that right.
Precautions taken by the legislator to prevent the abuse of that right.
I believed I ought to devote a separate chapter to judicial power. 
Its political importance is so great that it appeared to me that to speak of it in passing would diminish it in the eyes of readers.
There have been confederations elsewhere than in America; republics have been seen in places other than on the shores of the New World; the representative system has been adopted in several European states; but I do not think that, until now, any nation in the world has constituted judicial power in the same manner as the Americans.
What a foreigner understands only with the greatest difficulty in the United States is the judicial organization. 
There is so to speak no political event in which he does not hear the authority of the judge invoked; and he naturally concludes that in the United States the judge is one of the prime political powers. 
When, next, he comes to examine the constitution of the courts, he discovers at first only judicial prerogatives and habits in them. 
In his eyes the magistrate never seems to be introduced into public affairs except by chance, but this same chance recurs every day.
When the Parlement of Paris  made remonstrances and refused to register an edict, when it had a corrupt official cited at its bar, one openly perceived the political action of judicial power. 
But nothing similar is seen in the United States.
Americans have preserved in the judicial power all the characteristics by which one is accustomed to recognize it. 
They have enclosed it exactly in the circle in which it is in the habit of moving.
The first characteristic of judicial power among all peoples is to serve as an arbiter. 
In order that action on the part of the courts take place, there must be a dispute. 
In order that there be a judge, there must be a case. 
As long as a law does not give rise to a dispute, therefore, the judicial power has no occasion to occupy itself with it. 
The law exists, but the judicial power does not see it. 
When a judge, in connection with a case, attacks a law relative to that case, he extends the circle of his prerogatives, but he does not go outside it, since it was necessary in some way for him to judge the law in order to come to judge the case. 
When he pronounces on a law without starting from a case, he goes outside his sphere completely and enters that of the legislative power.
The second characteristic of judicial power is to pronounce on particular cases and not on general principles. 
Should a judge, in deciding a particular question, destroy a general principle by the certitude people have that, each of the consequences of this same principle being struck down in the same manner, the principle becomes sterile, he remains in the natural circle of his action; but should the judge attack the general principle directly and destroy it without having a particular case in view, he goes outside the circle in which all peoples have agreed to enclose him: he becomes something more important, more useful perhaps than a magistrate, but he ceases to represent judicial power.
The third characteristic of judicial power is to be able to act only when it is appealed to, or, following the legal expression, when it is seised [of a matter]. 
This characteristic is not encountered as generally as the other two. I believe nevertheless that despite exceptions, one can consider it essential. 
In its nature judicial power is without action; for it to move one must put it in motion. 
One denounces a crime to it, and it punishes the guilty; one appeals to it to redress an injustice, and it redresses it; one submits an act to it, and it interprets it; but it does not go by itself to prosecute criminals, search for injustice, and examine facts. 
The judicial power would in a way do violence to this passive nature if it took the initiative by itself and established itself as censor of the laws.
Americans have preserved these three distinctive characteristics in the judicial power. 
The American judge can only pronounce when there is litigation. 
He is never occupied except with a particular case; and in order to act he must always wait until he has been seised [of a matter].
The American judge therefore resembles perfectly the magistrates of other nations. Nevertheless, he is vested with an immense political power. 
How did that come about? 
He moves in the same circle and makes use of the same means as other judges; why does he possess a power that the latter do not have? 
The cause of it is in this sole fact: Americans have recognized in judges the right to found their rulings on the Constitution rather than on the laws. 
In other words, they have permitted them not to apply laws that might appear to them unconstitutional.
I know that a right like this has sometimes been claimed by courts of other countries; but it has never been conceded to them. 
In America, it is recognized by all powers; one encounters no party nor even a man who disputes it. 
The explanation for this will be found in the very principle of American constitutions.
In France, the constitution is an immutable work, or supposed to be so. 
No power can change anything in it: such is the received theory.
In England, they recognize in Parliament the right to modify the constitution. 
In England, the constitution can therefore change constantly, or rather it does not exist.
Parliament is at the same time the legislative body and the constituting body.
In America, political theories are simpler and more rational. 
An American constitution is not supposed to be immutable as in France; it cannot be modified by the ordinary powers of society as in England. 
It forms a separate work that, representing the will of all the people, obliges legislators as well as plain citizens, but that can be changed by the will of the people following forms that have been established and in cases that have been foreseen.
In America, the Constitution can therefore vary; but as long as it exists, it is the origin of all powers. 
The predominant force is in it alone.
It is easy to see how these differences must influence the position and rights of a judicial body in the three countries that I have cited. 
If, in France, the courts could disobey the laws on the ground that they find them unconstitutional, the constituting power would really be in their hands, since they alone would have the right to interpret a constitution whose terms no one could change.
They would therefore put themselves in the place of the nation and would dominate society, at least as much as the inherent weakness in the judicial power permitted them to do so.
I know that in refusing judges the right to declare the laws unconstitutional we indirectly give the legislative body the power to change the constitution, since it no longer encounters a legal barrier that stops it.
But it is still better to grant the power to change the people¡¯s constitution to men who imperfectly represent the will of the people than to others who represent only themselves.
It would be much more unreasonable yet to give English judges the right to resist the will of the legislative body, since Parliament, which makes the law, also makes the constitution, and since, consequently, one cannot in any case call a law unconstitutional when it emanates from the three powers.
Neither of these two reasonings is applicable to America.
In the United States, the Constitution dominates legislators as it does plain citizens.
It is therefore the first of laws, and it cannot be modified by a law.
It is therefore just that the courts obey the Constitution in preference to all laws.
This is due to the very essence of judicial power: to choose among legal arrangements the ones that fetter him most tightly is in a way the natural right of the magistrate.
In France, the constitution is equally the first of laws, and judges have an equal right to take it for the basis of their rulings; but in exercising this right, they could not fail to encroach on another still more sacred than theirs: that of the society in whose name they act.
Here ordinary reason must yield before reason of state.
In America, where the nation, by changing its constitution, can always reduce magistrates to obedience, a danger like this is not to be feared.
On this point politics and logic are therefore in accord, and there the people as well as the judge equally preserve their privileges.
When one invokes a law before the courts of the United States that the judge deems contrary to the Constitution, he can therefore refuse to apply it.
This power is the only one that is particular to the American magistrate, but a great political influence flows from it.
There are in fact very few laws of a nature to escape judicial analysis for long, for there are very few that do not hurt an individual interest and that litigants cannot or will not invoke before the courts.
Now, on the day when the judge refuses to apply a law in a case, at that instant it loses a part of its moral force.
Those whom it has wronged are then notified that a means exists of escaping the obligation of obeying it: cases multiply, and it falls into impotence.
One of two things then happens: the people change their constitution or the legislature rescinds its law.
Americans have therefore entrusted an immense political power to their courts; but in obliging them to attack the laws only by judicial means, they have much diminished the dangers of this power.
If the judge had been able to attack laws in a theoretical and general manner, if he had been able to take the initiative and censure the legislator, he would have entered onto the political stage with a bang; having become the champion or adversary of one party, he would have appealed to all the passions that divide the country to take part in the conflict.
But when the judge attacks a law in an obscure debate and over a particular application, he in part hides the importance of the attack from the regard of the public.
His ruling has the goal only of striking an individual interest; the law is injured only by chance.
Besides, the law thus censured is not destroyed: its moral force is diminished, but its material effect is not suspended.
It is only little by little and under the repeated blows of jurisprudence that it finally succumbs.
Furthermore, one understands without difficulty that in charging a particular interest with provoking the censure of laws, in intimately binding the case made against the law with the case made against one man, one is assured that legislation will not be attacked lightly.
In this system, it is no longer exposed to the daily aggression of the parties.
In pointing out the faults of the legislator, one obeys a real need: one starts from a positive and appreciable fact, since it must serve as the basis for a case.
I do not know if this manner of action by American courts is not, at the same time that it is most favorable to public order, also most favorable to liberty.