Chapter 2 The Challenge of Change
The trouble with our times is that the future is not what it used to be.
--Paul Valery, The Art of Poetry
One of the long-standing traditions in higher education is a university presidents welcoming address each fall to the new entering class of students.
This provides a rare opportunity to offer a few words of advice before students develop the college survival tactics of tuning out the deluge of boring/ extraneous, or confusing information that confronts them during their college days.
With this rare opportunity of student attentiveness in mind, I would generally begin my comments with the simple observation that our entering students would be spending most of their lives in the twenty-first century.
They would face the challenge of preparing for a time very different from the twentieth century society that shaped the lives of those on the faculty, those who would serve as their educators.
Furthermore, many of the features of the social institution responsible for their education, the university, could be traced back to far earlier times, decades or even centuries earlier.
Each time I raised this theme at a new student convocation, I became increasingly uneasy.
It was clear that the forces driving change in our society were far stronger than most realized.
Perhaps a more fundamental issue was whether the university, as we know it in the last years of the twentieth century, was prepared to educate the citizens, to serve the society, of a future that will almost certainly be radically different than anything we have known or even imagined.
This concern should, in fact, be neither alarming nor surprising.
It has been one of the most important themes throughout the long history of the university.
As one of civilizations most enduring institutions, the university has been extraordinary in its capacity to change and adapt to serve a changing society.
Far from being immutable, the university has changed considerably over time and continues to do so today.
Across our nation, the remarkable diversity of institutions of higher education, ranging from small liberal arts colleges to gigantic university systems, from storefront proprietary colleges to global /cyberspace/, universities, demonstrates the evolution of the species.
The situation of higher education today seems comparable in significance to two other periods of great change in the nature of the university in America: the period in the late nineteenth century when the major public universities first appeared, and the years following World War II, when the research university evolved to serve the needs of postwar America.
A century ago, the Industrial Revolution was trans forming our nation from an agrarian society into the industrial giant that would dominate the twentieth century.
The original colonial colleges, based on the elitist educational principles of Oxbridge, were joined by the land-grant state universities, committed to broad educational access and service to society.
In the decades following this period, higher education saw a massive growth in enrollments at the under graduate, graduate, and professional level, as a college education became available to ever-broader elements of our society.
A similar period of rapid change in higher education occurred after World War II.
The educational needs of the returning veterans, the role of the universities in conducting the research critical to national defense, and the booming postwar economy led to an explosion in both the size and number of major universities.
The direct involvement of the federal government in the support of student financial aid, campus-based research, and professional schools such as medicine and engineering led to the evolution of the contemporary university as we know it today.
We now face challenges and opportunities similar to those of these two earlier periods of transformation.
Many people point to negative factors, such as the rapidly growing costs of quality education and research during a period of limited resources, the erosion of public trust and confidence in higher education, and the deterioration in the partnership between the research university and the federal government.
But far more important will be the challenges presented by fundamental changes in our society: the degree to which knowledge itself is becoming a key driving force in determining economic prosperity, national security, and social well-being; the growing interdependence of nations; the changing demography of America as we become an ever more diverse society; the search for new national priorities in a post-Cold War world; and the need to develop sustainable futures as humankind increasingly pushes against the limits of our planet.
The sweeping nature and rapid pace of changes in the world we serve will demand similar changes in the university.
A Time of Challenge and Change
We are living in the most remarkable of times. Just consider, for a moment, some of the changes that have occurred in our world within the past decade£º The Cold War has ended, and Communism has been rejected around the worlds swept away by the winds of freedom and democracy. A new global order is evolving. We are now manipulating the human gene directly to cure disease, and we may soon be doing it to create new life forms and possibly even influence the evolution of the human species.
Computing power - speed, memory, communication rate - continues to increase by a factor of one-hundredfold each decade, with worldwide networks connecting hundreds of millions of people, enabling them to communicate with ease and sophistication, any place on the planet or even beyond.
Yet the changes in recent years are only the tip of the iceberg.
There has been a worldwide explosion of ethnic tensions, even as the nation-state has become less relevant to the world economy and security. Many of our traditional social structures have deteriorated, from our cities to our neighborhoods to the family itself. The explosion of new communication and transportation technologies has given us both new mobility and new markets, linking us both domestically and internationally in ways we never dreamed possible.
Yet it has also increasingly threatened long-standing social institutions such as businesses, governments, and perhaps universities with obsolescence and even irrelevance.
Some believe that we are going through a period of change in our civilization as momentous as any in our earlier history.
In contrast to earlier social transformations that evolved over centuries, the changes characterizing our times occur on time scales of decades or less.
This time of great change, of shifting paradigms, provides the context in which we must consider the evolving nature of the American university. We must take great care not simply to extrapolate the past, but rather to examine the full range of possibilities for the future.
To this end, let us first discuss in more detail the forces driving change in our world, our society, and in our social institutions.
While there are many ways to classify these forces, let us consider first broader societal forces of change and then focus on those of particular importance in driving change in higher education.
The Age of Knowledge
Looking back over history, one can identify certain periods of profound change in the nature, the fabric, of our civilization such as the Renaissance, the Age of Discovery, and the Industrial Revolution.
There are many who contend that our society is once again undergoing such a fundamental shift in perspective and structure.
The signs are all around us. We are evolving rapidly into a postindustrial, know edge-based society, just as a century ago an agrarian America evolved into an industrial nation.
Today industrial production is steadily shifting from material- and labor- intensive products and processes to knowledge-intensive products and services. A radically new system for creating wealth has evolved that depends upon the creation and application of new knowledge.
We are in a transition period where intellectual capital, brainpower, is replacing financial and physical capital as the key to our strength, prosperity, and well being.
In a very real sense, we are entering a new age, an age of knowledge, in which the key strategic resource necessary for prosperity has become knowledge itself, that is, educated people and their ideas.
As our society becomes ever more knowledge-inten sive, it becomes ever more dependent upon those social institutions that create knowledge, that educate people, and that provide them with knowledge and learning resources throughout their lives.
Our rapid evolution into a knowledge-based society has been driven in part by the emergence of powerful new information technologies such as computers, digital communications networks, multimedia, and virtual reality.
Modern electronic technologies have increased vastly our capacity to know and to do things and to communicate and collaborate with others.
They allow us to transmit information quickly and widely, linking distant places and diverse areas of endeavor in productive new ways.
This technology allows us to form and sustain communities for work, play, and learning in ways unimaginable just a decade ago.
Of course, our nation has been through other periods of dramatic change driven by technology, for example, the impact of the steam engine, telephone, automobile, and railroad in the late nineteenth century, which created our urban industrialized society.
But never before have we experienced a technology that has evolved so rapidly, increasing in power by a hundredfold every decade, obliterating the constraints of space and time, and reshaping the way we communicate, think, and learn.
Unlike natural resources such iron and oil that have driven earlier economic transformations, knowledge is inexhaustible. The more it is used, the more it multiples and expands.
But knowledge is not available to all. It can be absorbed and applied only by the educated mind.
Hence, schools in general and universities in particular will play increasingly important roles as our society enters this new age.
The increasingly sophisticated labor market of a knowledge-driven economy is driving new needs for advanced education and training. Even today roughly two-thirds of Americas high school graduates will pursue some form of college education, and this will likely increase as a college degree becomes the entry credential to the high- performance workplace in the years ahead.
There is an increasingly strong correlation between the level of ones education and personal prosperity and quality of life.
But the age of knowledge holds an even deeper significance for higher education.
In a sense, knowledge is the medium of the university. Through the activities of discovery, shaping, achieving, transmitting, and applying knowledge, the university serves society in myriad ways: educating the young, preserving our cultural heritage, providing the basic research so essential to our security and well-being, training our professionals and certifying their competence, challenging our society and stimulating social change.
Yet in a world in which knowledge and educated people have become the key to prosperity and security, there has been an increasing tendency for society to view the university as an engine for economic growth through the generation and application of new knowledge.
From a broader perspective, just as the loss of faith in government intervention has shifted political attention away from the distribution of wealth to its production, there has been a shift of emphasis within the university away from simply distributing and analyzing knowledge, for example, "teaching" and "scholarship" to creating knowledge, to activities such as ¡°innovation¡± and ¡°creativity.¡±
Demographic Change: The New Majorities
When Americans hear references to the demographic changes occurring in our nation, we probably first think of the aging of our population.7 It is true that the baby boomers have moved into middle age and soon will be approaching retirement, with worrisome consequences for our current entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare.
After a brief decline in the number of young adults during the 1980s and 1990s, we once again are seeing a growth in the number of college-age students, an echo of the baby boom generation.
Yet this growth in the number of young people is far exceeded by the growth in the number of senior citizens.
In this country, there will soon be more people over the age of sixty-five than there are teenagers, and this situation is certain to continue for the remainder of our lives.
Furthermore, the growth rate in both our population and our workforce is declining to the lowest level in our nations history.