1 Academic Freedom
IN THE SPRING OF 1977, Columbia University announced that it would offer Henry Kissinger a special chair in international relations amply endowed with funds for staff support and research. 
In the weeks that followed, many students and professors vigorously protested the appointment, citing Dr. Kissinger's involvement in the bombing of Hanoi, the invasion of Cambodia, and the prolongation of the Vietnam War. 
Eventually, the controversy died when Kissinger declared that he was not prepared to accept Columbia's offer. But the episode left a number of issues unresolved. 
Dr. Kissinger's attackers insisted that they were not violating his academic freedom by objecting to actions that he took as Secretary of State. 
And yet, was Columbia at liberty to reject Dr. Kissinger's appointment on the basis of policies he had earlier espoused, simply because he advocated them not as a scholar, but as a public servant? 
Should the administration have agreed to pass a moral judgment on those policies on the ground that they were no mere opinions but views translated into decisions causing death and destruction to thousands of people? 
In considering a faculty appointment, should the university evaluate a candidate's behavior in public office if the actions involved matters, such as the bombing of Hanoi, that bore no clear relation to his field of scholarly competence?
These questions remind us that disputes over academic freedom have not disappeared. 
In fact, they have grown more complicated in an age when faculty members have become involved with important controversies in the "real world." 
Such problems deserve thoughtful consideration, since they bear directly on the way a university functions and the values that underlie its intellectual activities.
The Case for Academic Freedom
Freedom of expression, in all its forms, can be justified on two fundamental grounds. 
For the individual, the right to speak and write as one chooses is a form of liberty that contributes in important ways to a rich and stimulating life. 
To be deprived of such liberty is to lose the chance to participate fully in an intellectual exchange that helps to develop one's values, to make one's meaning of the world, to exercise those qualities of mind and imagination that are most distinctively human. 
Beyond its significance to the individual, freedom of speech has traditionally been regarded in this country as important to the welfare of society. 
Throughout history, much progress has occurred through growth in our understanding of ourselves, our institutions, and the environment in which we live. 
But experience teaches us that major discoveries and advances in knowledge are often highly unsettling and distasteful to the existing order. 
Only rarely do individuals have the intelligence and imagination to conceive such ideas and the courage to express them openly. 
If we wish to stimulate progress, we cannot afford to inhibit such persons by imposing orthodoxies, censorship, and other artificial barriers to creative thought.
These reasons provide the intellectual foundation for the guarantees set forth in the First Amendment of our Constitution. 
Even so, we must acknowledge that our commitment to free speech is more a matter of faith than a product of logic or empirical demonstration. 
It is always possible that the exercise of this liberty will produce mistakes and misperceptions that will mislead the public and actually result in harmful policies. 
In contrast to many other countries, however, ours has elected to guard against these dangers not by censorship, but by encouraging open discussion in which ideas can be subjected to criticism and errors can be corrected through continuing argument and debate.
Universities should be unreserved in supporting these principles, since freedom of expression is critical to their central mission. 
This point deserves a word of elaboration, for now that universities have become more involved in the society and more important to its development, they have acquired different constituencies that view their purpose in somewhat different ways. 
To parents and students, universities are chiefly places where young people can obtain an education and spend several pleasant, intellectually stimulating years. 
To the learned callings, universities are the locus of leading professional schools that select able students and train them to serve as competent practitioners. 
To the government, universities are vehicles to help achieve social goals, such as equal opportunity for minorities, as well as important sources of sophisticated knowledge needed for defense, foreign policy, medicine, and technological development. 
To corporate and foundation executives, along with public officials, universities are also valuable repositories of expertise from which to gain advice in addressing complicated questions.
Though all of these perceptions are accurate, we could probably obtain most of the services mentioned without having to create a university. 
For example, independent colleges could provide an excellent undergraduate education, as many of them do already. 
Separate institutions could be formed to offer professional training adequate to meet our practical needs. 
And consulting organizations could supply the specialized advice and analysis that public agencies and other institutions so often seek.
While the various functions of the university could be reorganized and redistributed in this fashion, something important would be lost. 
Neither colleges, nor consulting organizations, nor professional training schools can satisfy society's need for new knowledge and discovery. 
True, one could look to some sort of research institute to perform this function. But even this alternative would not wholly replace what universities can supply. 
It is the special function of the university to combine education with research, and knowledgeable observers believe that this combination has distinct advantages both for teaching and for science and scholarship. 
Experience suggests that graduate students learn best from working directly with able and established professors actively engaged in their own research, while the latter benefit in turn from the stimulation they derive from inquiring young associates. 
Without the marriage of teaching and research that universities uniquely provide, the conduct of scholarly inquiry and scientific investigation, as well as the progress of graduate training, would be unlikely to continue at the level of quality achieved over the past two generations. 
In a society heavily dependent on advanced education and highly specialized knowledge, such a decline could be seriously detrimental to the public welfare.
If this unique combination of education and discovery is the chief contribution of the university, how can its progress be secured? 
Apart from the libraries, laboratories, and other facilities important to research, two ingredients are especially important. 
The first of these is the ability to recruit the ablest and most creative people that can be attracted into academic life. 
The second critical element is an environment of freedom in which professors can do their work without constraints or external direction. 
Highly intelligent, imaginative people tend to resist orders from above and do not do their best work under such conditions. 
Even less desirable than centralized direction is the imposition of restraints on the kinds of ideas and hypotheses that scholars can publicly entertain, for such restrictions stifle the spirit of venture some inquiry while blocking off entire fields of investigation that seem threatening to those who have strong interests in maintaining the status quo.
For these reasons, academic freedom is not merely a reflection of society's commitment to free speech; it is a safeguard essential to the aims of the university and to the welfare of those who work within it. 
Teachers and scholars have a vital stake in continuing to enjoy the liberty to speak and write as they choose, because their lives are entirely devoted to developing and expounding ideas. 
Universities in turn have a critical interest in preserving free expression, for without that freedom they will be hampered in appointing the most creative scientists and scholars and will suffer from forms of censorship that will jeopardize the search for knowledge and new discovery that represents their most distinctive contribution.
Opposition to Academic Freedom
Despite the force of these arguments, attacks upon academic freedom have continued over the years since the doctrine was proclaimed in 1915. 
For several decades, the assaults came chiefly from conservative groups disturbed by theories and ideas that seemed to undermine prevailing orthodoxies. 
More recently, however, the greatest challenges to free expression on the campus have come from students and faculty on the Left who have launched vigorous attacks on professors involved in the Vietnam War or in disputes over matters affecting race. 
For example, at least one academic association has condemned scholars for conducting research of a "racist" nature. 
Moreover, in a survey published in 1976, 11 percent of the professors who responded agreed that "academic research on the genetic bases of differences in intelligence should not be permitted, because it serves to sustain a fundamentally racist perspective," and 18 percent supported the proposition that such research "should be discouraged because it can easily serve to reinforce racial prejudices."
Regardless of their political coloration, all attacks on academic freedom rest upon a single rationale. 
To opponents of free expression, ideas are powerful; they frequently affect public policy and are used to justify important decisions. 
As a result, misguided theories and specious arguments can cause considerable harm. 
Granted, one can always try to counter such views with opposing arguments. 
Yet only in science can errors be disproved decisively, and even there fallacious theories may linger for decades before they are finally put to rest. 
In matters of social policy, shoddy ideas and dubious theories can persist indefinitely and be exploited by powerful people to justify inhumane and exploitative policies. 
Hence, those who advocate censorship will acknowledge the value of free speech but argue that there are times when particular theories and opinions threaten to produce such grievous harm that they must be suppressed.
In presenting this view, opponents of academic freedom overlook two glaring weaknesses in their position. 
In the first place, history reveals that those who try to stamp out heresy often make egregious mistakes. 
Since the time of Socrates, intellectuals have been penalized under circumstances that seem embarrassing in retrospect. 
Professors have been dismissed or denied appointments for upholding the right to strike, for advocating racial integration, for refusing to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee, for supporting the recognition of Communist China. 
As noted a figure as Bertrand Russell was barred from teaching at the City College of New York for propounding "immoral and salacious doctrines" that seemed to condone extramarital sex. 
Groups that seek to impose their orthodoxies today will presumably concede these errors, but will insist that their own opinions rest on firmer ground. 
Yet those who attacked professors in the past must also have believed in the rightness of their cause. 
Insofar as we can tell, their actions stemmed from a sincere belief that it would be harmful to students and to the public at large to employ teachers who expressed ideas and supported policies that seemed at the time to be dangerously misguided. 
Despite these good intentions, the results were often sadly mistaken, and we should be honest enough to acknowledge that similar errors will occur if we begin to penalize professors for their moral, political, or economic beliefs.
The second fallacy in all attempts at censorship is the implicit assumption that only like-minded people will be able to decide which orthodoxies to impose. 
Bankers and industrialists proceeded on this premise at the turn of the century when business values predominated in the society. 
Radicals seem to have acted on the same assumption during the brief period in the late 1960s when their militant tactics threatened to push all opposition aside on campuses across the country. 
But history suggests that no faction can wield decisive influence indefinitely and that groups with differing views will be ready to wage war against unpopular opinions whenever the opportunity arises. 
It required no more than a decade to discover how grossly the radicals overestimated their power and how quickly they were followed by fundamentalist groups and conservative forces intent on pressing their own values on television programming, school textbooks, and other means of communication. 
Ironically, the very professors who disdained academic freedom only ten years ago could soon find themselves clinging to the doctrine to protect themselves against the tide of conservative ideologies.