Chapter 1 Political Order and Political Decay
The Political Gap
The most important political distinction among countries concerns not their form of government but their degree of government. 
The differences between democracy and dictatorship are less than the differences between those countries whose politics embodies consensus, community, legitimacy, organization, effectiveness, stability, and those countries whose politics is deficient in these qualities. 
Communist totalitarian states and Western liberal states both belong generally in the category of effective rather than debile political systems. 
The United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union have difFerent forms of government, but in all three systems the government governs. Each country is a political community with an overwhelming consensus among the people on the legitimacy of the political system. 
In each country the citizens and their leaders share a vision of the public interest of the society and of the traditions and principles upon which the political community is based. 
All three countries have strong, adaptable, coherent political institutions: effective bureaucracies, well-organized political parties, a high degree of popular participation in public affairs, working systems of civilian control over the military, extensive activity by the government in the economy, and reasonably effective procedures for regulating succession and controlling political conflict. 
These governments command the loyalties of their citizens and thus have the capacity to tax resources, to conscript manpower, and to innovate and to execute policy. 
If the Politburo, the Cabinet, or the President makes a decision, the probability is high that it will be implemented through the government machinery.
In all these characteristics the political systems of the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union differ significantly from the governments which exist in many, if not most, of the modernizing countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. 
These countries lack many things. 
They suffer real shortages of food, literacy, education, wealth, income, health, and productivity, but most of them have been recognized and efforts made to do something about them. 
Beyond and behind these shortages, however, there is a greater shortage: a shortage of political community and of effective, authoritative, legitimate government. 
"I do know, Walter Lippmann has observed, ¡°that there is no greater necessity for men who live in communities than that they be governed, selfgoverned if possible, well-governed if they are fortunate, but in any event, governed." 
Mr. Lippmann wrote these words in a moment of despair about the United States. 
But they apply in for greater measure to the modernizing countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, where the political community is fragmented against itself and where political institutions have little power, less majesty, and no resiliency¡ªwhere, in many cases, governments simply do not govern.
In the mid-1950s, Gunnar Myrdal called the world's attention to the apparent fact that the rich nations of the world were getting richer, absolutely and relatively, at a faster rate than the poorer nations. 
"On the whole," he argued, ¡°in recent decades the economic inequalities between developed and underdeveloped countries have been increasing". 
In 1966 the president of the World Bank similarly pointed out that at current rates of growth the gap in per capita national income between the United States and forty underdeveloped countries would increase fifty per cent by the year 2000.
 Clearly, a central issue, perhaps the central issue, in international and developmental economics is the apparently remorseless tendency for this economic gap to broaden. 
A similar and equally urgent problem exists in politics. 
In politics as in economics the gap between developed political systems and underdeveloped political systems, between civic polities and corrupt polities, has broadened. 
This political gap resembles and is related to the economic gap, but it is not identical with it. 
Countries with underdeveloped economies may have highly developed political systems, and countries which have achieved high levels of economic welfare may still have disorganized and chaotic politics. 
Yet in the twentieth century the principal locus of political underdevelopment, like that of economic underdevelopment, tends to be the modernizing countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
With a few notable exceptions, the political evolution of these countries after World War II was characterized by increasing ethnic and class conflict, recurring rioting and mob violence, frequent military coups d'etat, the dominance of unstable personalistic leaders who often pursued disastrous economic and social policies, widespread and blatant corruption among cabinet ministers and civil servants, arbitrary infringement of the rights and liberties of citizens, declining standards of bureaucratic efficiency and performance, the pervasive alienation of urban political groups, the loss of authority by legislatures and courts, and the fragmentation and at times complete disintegration of broadly based political parties. 
In the two decades after World War II, successful coups d'etat occurred in 17 of 20 Latin American countries (only Mexico, Chile, and Uruguay maintaining constitutional processes) ,in a half-dozen North African and Middle Eastern states (Algeria, Egypt, Syria, the Sudan, Iraq, Turkey), in a like number of west African and central African countries (Ghana, Nigeria, Dahomey, Upper Volta, Central African Republic, Congo), and in a variety of Asian societies (Pakistan, Thailand, Laos, South Vietnam, Burma, Indonesia, South Korea). 
Revolutionary violence, insurrection, and guerrilla warfare wracked Cuba, Bolivia, Peru, Venezuela, Colombia, Guatemala, and the Dominican Republic in Latin America, Algeria and Yemen in the Middle East, and Indonesia, Thailand, Vietnam, China, the Philippines, Malaya, and Laos in Asia. 
Racial, tribal, or communal violence or tension disrupted Guyana, Morocco, Iraq, Nigeria, Uganda, the Congo, Burundi, the Sudan, Ruanda, Cyprus, India, Ceylon, Burma, Laos, and South Vietnam. 
In Latin America, old-style, oligarchic dictatorships in countries like Haiti, Paraguay, and Nicaragua maintained a fragile police-based rule. 
In the eastern hemisphere, traditional regimes in Iran, Libya, Arabia, Ethiopia, and Thailand struggled to reform themselves even as they teetered on the brink of revolutionary overthrow.
During the 1950s and 1960s the numerical incidence of political violence and disorder increased dramatically in most countries of the world. 
The year 1958, according to one calculation, witnessed some 28 prolonged guerrilla insurgencies, four military uprisings, and two conventional wars. 
Seven years later, in 1965, 42 prolonged insurgencies were underway; ten military revolts occurred; and five conventional conflicts were being fought. 
Political instability also increased significantly during the 1950s and 1960s. 
Violence and other destabilizing events were five times more frequent between 1955 and 1962 than they were between 1948 and 1954. 
Sixty-four o? 84 countries were less stable in the latter period than in the earlier one? 
Throughout Asia, Africa, and Latin America there was a decline in political order, an undermining of the authority, effectiveness, and legitimacy of government. 
There was a lack of civic morale and public spirit and of political institutions capable of giving meaning and direction to the public interest. 
Not political development but political decay dominated the scene.
What was responsible for this violence and instability? 
The primary thesis of this book is that it was in large part the product of rapid social change and the rapid mobilization of new groups into politics coupled with the slow development of political institutions. 
"Among the laws that rule human societies de Tocqueville observed, "there is one which seems to be more precise and clear than all others. If men are to remain civilized or to become so, the art of associating together must grow and improve in the same ratio in which the equality of conditions is increased. "
The political instability in Asia, Africa, and Latin America derives precisely from the failure to meet this condition: equality of political participation is growing much more rapidly than ¡°the art of associating together."
 Social and economic change¡ªurbanization, increases in literacy and education, industrialization, mass media expansion¡ª extend political consciousness, multiply political demands, broaden political participation. 
These changes undermine traditional sources of political authority and traditional political institutions; they enormously complicate the problems of creating new bases of political association and new political institutions combining legitimacy and effectiveness. 
The rates of social mobilization and the expansion of political participation are high; the rates of political organization and institutionalization are low. 
The result is political instability and disorder. 
The primary problem of politics is the lag in the development of political institutions behind social and economic change.
For two decades after World War II American foreign policy failed to come to grips with this problem. 
The economic gap, in contrast to the political gap, was the target of sustained attention, analysis, and action. 
Aid programs and loan programs, the World Bank and regional banks, the un and the oecd, consortia and combines, planners and politicians, all shared in a massive efiEort to do something about the problem of economic development. 
Who, however, was concerned with the political gap? 
American officials recognized that the United States had a primary interest in the creation of viable political regimes in modernizing countries. 
But few, if any, of all the activities of the American government affecting those countries were directly concerned with the promotion of political stability and the reduction of the political gap. 
How can this astonishing lacuna be explained?
It would appear to be rooted in two distinct aspects of the American historical experience. 
In confronting the modernizing countries the United States was handicapped by its happy history. 
In its development the United States was blessed with more than its fair share of economic plenty, social well-being, and political stability. 
This pleasant conjuncture of blessings led Americans to believe in the unity of goodness: to assume that all good things go together and that the achievement of one desirable social goal aids in the achievement of others. 
In American policy toward modernizing countries this experience was reflected in the belief that political stability would be the natural and inevitable result of the achievement of, first, economic development and then of social reform. 
Throughout the 1950s the prevailing assumption of American policy was that economic development¡ªthe elimination of poverty, disease, illiteracy¡ªwas necessary for political development and political stability. 
In American thinking the causal chain was: economic assistance promotes economic development, economic development promotes political stability. 
This dogma was enshrined in legislation and, perhaps more important, it was ingrained in the thinking of officials in aid and other agencies concerned with the foreign assistance programs.
If political decay and political instability were more rampant in Asia, Africa, and Latin America in 1965 than they were fifteen years earlier, it was in part because American policy reflected this erroneous dogma. 
For in fact, economic development and political stability are two independent goals and progress toward one has no necessary connection with progress toward the other. 
In some instances programs of economic development may promote political stability; in other instances they may seriously undermine such stability. 
So also, some forms of political stability may encourage economic growth; other forms may discourage it. 
India was one of the poorest countries in the world in the 1950s and had only a modest rate of economic growth. Yet through the Congress Party it achieved a high degree of political stability. 
Per capita incomes in Argentina and Venezuela were perhaps ten times that in India, and Venezuela had a phenomenal rate of economic growth. 
Yet for both countries stability remained an elusive goal.
With the Alliance for Progress in 1961, social reform¡ªthat is, the more equitable distribution of material and symbolic resources joined economic development as a conscious and explicit goal of American policy toward modernizing countries. 
This development was, in part, a reaction to the Cuban Revolution, and it reflected the assumption among policymakers that land and tax reforms, housing projects, and welfare programs would reduce social tensions and deactivate the fuse to Fidelismo. 
Once again political stability was to be the by-product of the achievement of another socially desirable goal. 
In fact, of course, the relationship between social reform and political stability resembles that between economic development and political stability. 
In some circumstances reforms may reduce tensions and encourage peaceful rather than violent change. 
In other circumstances, however, reform may well exacerbate tensions precipitate violence, and be a catalyst of rather than a substitute for revolution.