2. Figur Politik
The most penetrating critique linking new German painting to past styles, and, ultimately, to past ideologies, is Benjamin H. D. Buchloh¡¯s ¡°Figures of Authority, Ciphers of Regres sion.¡± 
Buchloh equates figurative tendencies in German art to fascism. 
His observations, always trenchant, are worth quoting from at length.
The reference to expressionism in contemporary West German art is the natural move to make at a time when the myth of cultural identity is to be established specifically against the dominance of American art during the entire period of reconstruction. 
Since the Second World War, expressionism, the German intuition of early twentieth-century modern painting, has received increasing esteem. 
It had of course lacked just this esteem in the post-World War I period, prior to its eventual suppression under fascism. 
But during the early sixties sky rocketing prices indicated that expressionism had achieved the status of a national treasure, the best of the pre-Fascist heritage of German culture. 
As opposed to the political radicalism of Berlin dada, expressionism presented an avant-garde position acceptable to the newly reconstituted upper middle class, and it thus became the key object for historical study, collection and speculation. 
The apolitical humanitarian stance of the expressionist artists, their devotion to spiritual regeneration, their critique of technology, and their romanticization of exotic and primal experience perfectly accorded with the desire for an art that would provide spiritual salvation from the daily experience of alienation resulting from the dynamic reconstruction of postwar capitalism.
Buchloh asks whether there is a causal connection ¡°by which growing political oppression necessarily and irreversibly generates traditional representation. 
With a sense of trepida tion he wonders whether ¡°the brutal increase of restrictions in socioeconomic and political life unavoidably result in the bleak anonymity and passivity of the compulsively mimetic modes that we witness, for example, in European painting of the mid- 1920s and early 1930s.¡± 
Buchloh¡¯s attack on figurative painting as retrograde and politically suspect rigorously formulates a critique that runs beneath the surface of much of the analysis (particularly American) of German figurative painting. 
The politics of figuration reaches its other extreme in Donald Kuspit¡¯s 1983 riposte to Buchloh¡¯s attack (which Kuspit termed ¡°a Marxist blitzkrieg¡±), in ¡°Flak from the ¡®Radicals¡¯: The American Case Against Current German Painting.¡± 
In that article, Kuspit resorts to drastic critical gymnastics in order to situate new German expressionism as the true home for radical art today. 
Along the way he generalizes and hyperbolizes the work into the great cure for the German problem, for which abstraction is no more than a placebo.
The new German painters perform an extraordinary service for the German people. 
They lay to rest the ghosts ¡ª profound as only the monstrous can be ¡ª of German style, culture, and history, so that the people can be authentically new.... 
They can now identify themselves without first being identified as the ¡°strange Others." 
They can be freed of a past identity by artistically reliving it. 
The new German painting naturalizes a denatured abstract notion of ¡°being German,¡± without first forcing a new German nature upon us.... 
to see these pictures is to be confronted with the special necessity and special freedom of the Germanic today. 
Indeed, it is the same necessity and freedom that constitutes us all, for we are all increasingly possessed by an abstract past that we must transcend. 
Above all, we are increasingly possessed by the demonic power of abstraction. 
It makes us forget our potential for naturalness, which, for all its uncertainty, is more of a due to our future than the certainty our abstract knowledge gives us. 
The new German painters want to recover this apparently specious naturalness because they regard it as the only alternative to an abstractness that has made us hollow.
Polemically spirited, both positions leave us at sea with respect to the paintings and painters themselves, grouping ideologically that which defies categorization and avoiding completely the visual issues of what these pictures actually look like. 
Even if one acknowledges its history-seeking features, an extraordinary aspect of Refigured Paintings for example, is the intensity with which its imagery resists established relationships of figure to ground. 
Scanning the show, one comes face to face with an astonishing abundance of free-floating figura signs: strong shapes which systematically avoid the grounding properties of perspectival lines;
 laconic, mechanico-serial icons overlaid onto visually unrelated fields; 
formulaic Pop Art motifs transcribed into rich, painterly ¡°significant forms¡±; 
car-toonish characters and art-world caricatures;
 unfettered stick people suspended on the canvas like algebraic signs in .1 state of permanent disequivalence; 
and angular, aggressively colored silhouettes dispersed across the pictorial field with fluid, full arm strokes of the brush. 
All lushly painted, and without doubt figural, the dominant images of this exhibition nevertheless remain unhinged from ground, drifting fragments of narrative intent.
Indeed, the most compelling forms within this show sys tematically isolate themselves from the material, compositional and brushstroke-based concordance with ground that has been a fundamental assumption of both figurative and nonfigurative painting throughout the twentieth century. 
Figures and forms are repeatedly rendered with a straightforward, stubborn sim plicity verging on the banal. 
Images consistently emerge with the direct force of advertising art. 
Figure to ground relationships, however, often remain ambivalent, defined neither by composition nor by the organizing stroke of the brush. 
Whether it is Schonebeck's The Hanged Man, in which the human figure is physically maligned and stunted as if by the act of painting itself, the actual body parts losing out to a fury of painterly jabs; 
or whether it is Norbert Tadeusz¡¯s 1963 Women on a Bed, in which the supine nude is tipped forward into vertical contact with the picture surface (in this case, an American surface, or more precisely the Californian surface of Richard Diebenkorn and David Park, whom Tadeusz much admires), so that she neither sleeps nor stands, her bed becoming neither solid nor void; 
or whether it is Markus Lupertz¡¯s Ratman in which the main actors swirl in an aqueous, gravity-free space; 
or whether it is Georg Herold's Egypt (cat. no. 168), in which the entire Sahara is summed up with the lapidary gesture of two thin brushstokes making delicate triangles, brief signs for great pyramids; 
or whether, finally, it is Anselm Kiefer's Ways of Worldly Wisdom: Arminius's Hat tie (cat. no. 177), the vast papered plane of the picture ground becoming a physical equivalent for segmented cultural which is then punctured by an array of high-Germanic hero portraits, the faces and deep forest spatially eliding into a cultural memory landscape - in each instance, the major figural elements find their place neither within illusionist pictorial space, nor within the physical matrix of the work¡¯s materiality. 
Neither window nor billboard, the pictorial structures offer their figural elements neither an illusionistic envelope of space, nor a flat surface on which they can sit like bits of informational applique.
Time and again in recent German painting we see the fates of the figure launched with little regard for the unity of a pictorial entity; 
with some consistency, however, these works remain allusive in a way that is more coherent than not, alluding in particular to the communicative prospect of the figure on ground, though there is no consensus at all across the exhibition as to what is to be done with the figure, how it is to be presented in its decisive moment, how and upon what it is to be grounded. 
Many options are pursued, few of them following the primary concern of modernist painting, the formal prerequisite which, while endlessly deferred, is ultimately self- referential - the pure stroke of the brush, the overall material complex, the submersion of the figure in the playful enterprise of formal manipulation. 
This nostalgia of form which characterizes modernist painting in its purist state, the endless self-reference which is modernism's most fulsome and pleasing moment, is generally absent from Refigured Painting. 
In this context, it is important to note that there was no Clement Greenberg for German figurative art, no dear critical voice to articulate and bundle its primary desire. 
Nor was there a Frank Stella or Jasper Johns, or any other maker of objects who set such an unequivocal path with respect to the phenomenologi cal requirements of post-1950s German painting, that it could become anything like Pop Art or Mimimalism. 
Instead refig ured painting exists as a series of varied responses - sometimes grouped in philosophical and geographical nodes - to the particular German situation in the decade following the end of World War II.
It is therefore important to recognize that as much as the figure - as a symbol for illusionistic, representational, anti- conceptual, antiabstractionist art, as the marker of a ret rograde position, or as the harbinger of postmodernist possibilities - is discussed and debated, figure qua figure is not at all the issue in recent German painting. 
What is at issue throughout this exhibition is the specific means by which oil on canvas might communicate meaning in a period poised be tween the petro-chemical and information ages, and in a country that is forced to struggle, perhaps forever, as a postwar nation. 
The breadth and diversity of the exhibition further reveal how, in Germany between 1960 and 1988, painting cannot be understood as a genre - as a unified field of aesthetic activity. 
Recent German figurative painting breaks down into a field much more complex than that of nonsculpture, nonper formance or nonconcept art. 
While German figurative painting of the past three decades is a matter of image making that advances recognizable, representational shapes within varying types of narrative structure, the nature of figuration in post-1950s German painting nevertheless remains more important and problematic than a simple dialectic between representation and abstraction, illusionism and critical practice or romanti cism and analytical progress. 
To understand the means and motives of German figurative painting from 1960 to 1988 is to understand it quite specifically as a postwar or - even more precisely as a post-1950s - phenomenon.
3. Figuration and Postwar Germany
In postwar German painting of the 1940s and 50s, political and cultural ideology materialized in the painted figure. 
Progressive, obviously postfascist positions were associated with international modernism, which was in turn linked to specific forms of abstract painterly expressiveness and, more generally, to a certain agitated physicality of pigment on ground. 
A kind of postwar cultural vertigo translated into a sweeping acceptance of abstractionist tendencies, and the result was an abundance of dense, paint-strewn canvases loaded down with pigment and the seeming gestures of freedom. 
And within this cultural construct, the narrative consequence of ¡°objective¡± painting was subsumed in the material truth of pigment on ground.
In 1945 the critic Werner Haftmann asked "whether or not in view of the completeness of the collapse and devastation, the deeper mutuality of the creative forces had also been destroyed and Alfred Hentzen wrote that the German situation in 1945 could not be compared to 1919, because the soul- destroying cultural policies of National Socialism had left be hind a tabula rasa. 
It was impossible to take up where on had left off in 1933.
Willi Baumeister's diary from October 20, 1945, reads
The year 1945 did not bring with it the kind of general artistic rebirth that took place in 1919. The energy of creative individuals was impaired by years of systematic humbug and intimidation. 
The young had seen no real contemporary art. 
Klee and Kandinsky had died abroad; Schlemmer had died in Ger many; Kirchner had shot himself in Switzerland....
The issue facing postwar artists, as laid out by Haftmann. Hentzen and Baumeister, was how to recover from a near total break with the national cultural heritage and a near total loss of international cultural legitimacy. 
What ensued in the post war vacuum was a remarkable debate about the place of the figure in postwar painting, a debate in which the figure, imbued with the representational bias of a retrograde, Hitler-tainted program, arose from the canvas as a sort of place marker of the immediate past, while abstraction or, more precisely, nonfiguration, blessed by the absence of the figure, rep resented the future.