2.The Media Culture Paradigm
In the past 15 years, there has been a major transformation in the ways in which sociologists view the impact of the media, especially the media that attempt to reach the latest audiences.
The two major theoretical perspectives from which the media were viewed before that time were identified with functionalism and Marxism, respectively.
Functionalist theory viewed the media as neutral instruments for transmitting information and ideas. 
The principal question to be examined was the extent to which the public was able to recall or implement information received from the media.
Marxist theory took the opposite position. 
The media were not neutral; they transmitted the perspectives of social elites in the form of mass culture that was accepted uncritically by the public.
What today can be identified as the media culture paradigm originated in two types of studies: (1) studies of the nature and content of news created for newspapers and television and (2) studies of television as a medium rather than as a device for transmitting visual and verbal messages.
The enormous importance that television has assumed in contemporary society has forced social scientists to rethink the nature of communication in general and the transmission of ideology in particular (Kellner, 1982).
In the 1980s, both of these perspectives were applied to the analysis of television entertainment.
Recent theories have reconceptualized both the nature of media messages and the nature of the publics response. 
The new approach dispenses with the paradigm of a causal chain in which a message is sent to a receiver.
Instead of viewing the media as neutral instruments for transmitting information and ideas, there is now considerable debate about how the media transform and interpret reality in the process of disseminating news and entertainment to the public.
The principal objective of previous research was to assess whether or not individuals had absorbed specific items of information from the media. 
In the new theories, the impact of the media is seen as the outcome of interaction between the media and its audience. 
Audiences belonging to different social groups, ranging from dominant to marginal, interpret the same messages in very different ways.
According to Fiske (1989), "The text can no longer be seen as a self-sufficient entity that bears its own meaning and exerts a similar influence on all its readers. 
Rather, it is seen as a potential of meanings that can be activated in a number of ways" (p. 269).
The Media Culture Paradigm: Framing the News  
In the early 1970s, a number of sociologists in both America and Europe began to reconceptualize the process of gathering and creating news and information from the media. 
The media were perceived to be interpreting reality in the process of transmitting it. 
The central idea here is that news stories are framed in certain ways that influence the public's perception of their content.
Framing occurs through the selection of certain stories rather than others and by the techniques that are used in presenting stories that are selected for dissemination, such as fitting the information into narrative formats or imposing a specific angle that highlights certain details rather than others, such as controversy, danger, or conflict (Campbell, 1987).
Molotch and Lester (1974) developed a useful model of how information is selected by the news media. 
Rather than viewing the selection of events for news reports as being based on objective criteria for assessing the relative importance of such events, Molotch and Lester (1974) argue that the selection of news stories is actually determined by the way reporters go about seeking news rather than by the characteristics of the events themselves.
In other words, the selection of news stories ¡ª what becomes news or is defined as news~is guided more by the requirements and practices of news organizations than by the real world of events.
The majority of the news in newspapers and television newscasts consists of routine events that are defined as important by those in positions of power, either political leaders or bureaucratic officials. 
The remainder consists of nonroutine events such as scandals, accidents, and planned disruptions of routine events that provide information about the unofficial aspects of political and bureaucratic realities.
As a result of the necessity to respond to nonroutine events, those in power can lose control over the process of defining political and social reality. 
It is significant that most recent U.S. presidents have lost control over public opinion at some time during their tenure in office (Drier, 1982). 
In other words, because the news media must respond to events beyond their control, there is more diversity in the opinions and perspectives represented in the media than would be predicted on the basis of their ownership.
Another way in which the media frame content is by presenting information in certain ways.
Snow (1983) analyzes the characteristics of media messages to understand the nature of their effects.
How do the media transform information and ideas in the process of transmitting them? 
He argues that one way this is done is by presenting information according to formats that are both predictable and easily understood, such as entertainment, drama, or conflict.
The scheduling of programs influences how they are perceived, as does the rhythm and tempo of production and the use of the camera, lighting, editing, and music.
Advertising is a prime example of the way in which the presentation of content can affect its meaning and its impact on the audience. 
The basic technique underlying many advertisements is that of placing the product in a particular type of symbolic context that confers meanings on the product that it does not intrinsically possess. 
Specifically, objects or people that have connotations for the segment of the public that the advertiser hopes to reach are presented next to the product.
Williamson (1978) argues that advertisements take meaning systems from other areas of culture and use them to confer meaning on a product. 
The advertiser intends these characteristics to become part of the image of the product in the viewer's mind. 
Two types of associations are made.
In the first, an object or a person is associated with a product and confers its meaning on the product. 
Certain types of associations, particularly those ways of implying that an object is sacred or an individual is powerful, have been used so frequently that they have become cliches (Marchand, 1986).
Alternatively, the product itself is made to indicate a specific message or to serve as a currency that can be traded for something else, such as success, love, or happiness.
Enormous artistry and skill is lavished on the creation of advertising images and messages that manipulate symbolic meanings with considerable sophistication but at the same time very selectively to present business in all its facets in an almost exclusively positive light.
In spite of its ubiquity in modem society, advertising is believed to have very limited effects on most people, with the exception of individuals who are already committed to using a certain type of product and who can be persuaded to select or switch to a particular brand (Schudson, 1984).
The Media Culture Paradigm and Ideology 
During the course of the 20th century, the shift to a media-dominated and media-saturated society changed the way in which ideology was transmitted in Western societies. 
The shift from print media exclusively to a combination of print and broadcast media had profound effects on the dissemination of ideological content. 
Consequently, contemporary Marxist theories have reconceptualized the nature and role of ideology; it is no longer determined exclusively by economic factors (White, 1989).
Society is viewed as consisting of numerous groups with both conflicting and parallel interests that cannot be reduced entirely to economic interests. 
Each social institution is viewed as being autonomous from the others and as potentially developing an ideology that is in conflict with or contradictory to the others. 
Similarly, the media disseminates a variety of messages that also cannot be interpreted entirely as the expression of economic interests. 
Because the individual may embody memberships in different groups, his or her responses to a particular ideological message may be expected to vary.
This approach to ideology suggests the usefulness of examining the ways in which the media express ideologies associated with different social groups as well as the ways in which individuals respond to and interpret ideological messages in the media.
For example, the British cultural studies group is interested in the techniques that the media use to manipulate information.
2 What Snow (1983) refers to as the grammar of the media is discussed by members of this group as encoding/decoding techniques.
Hall (1977) defines three major ideological functions of the media.
First, the media provide an inventory of lifestyles and ideologies by presenting the various lifestyles and behaviors of different social groups.
Second, the media classify these materials and interpret them in terms of their relationships to the center and the periphery of the social sphere to convince the public of the legitimacy of the center's position. 
According to Hall (1977), the core media perform a major role in defining reality for all members of society, within the framework of the dominant ideology. 
Hall regards this function performed by the core media as being necessary in modem societies because of the fragmentation and plurality of world views. 
The mass media provide us with ideas about how other social groups in society live so that we can make sense of society as a whole.
Finally, to perform these tasks, the media assign different interpretations to events by coding them in various ways and by placing events in contexts that assign different levels of prestige and importance to them.
For example, some types of events and behaviors are considered to belong to the dominant code, others to the professional or expert code, still others are defined as being subject to negotiation between those who support dominant and opposition codes, and the remainder is assigned to the role of the opposition.
Ideas and behaviors that are included in the opposition tend to be those that are regarded as being minority positions that are not too far removed from the mainstream. 
Extreme views are likely to be excluded altogether. 
In other words, a certain amount of criticism of the dominant ideology is permitted, but not too much.
Techniques that the media use for preventing opposition views from winning the consensus of the public are the following: (1) stressing the importance of the individual, particularly the individual as a passive consumer; (2) masking or concealing the true nature of the relations between social classes in terms of the extent to which the dominant class exploits other social classes; (3) emphasizing individual rather than collective solutions to social problems; (4) assimilating opposing or divergent viewpoints and thereby defusing them; and (5) providing an illusion of social cohesion by concealing the true relationships between social classes.
Because there are many contradictions and inconsistencies in the social system, the media do not succeed in producing social cohesion and complete acceptance of the dominant ideology.
Although Hall's (1977) theory is the most insistent on the power of a dominant ideology and a dominant social elite, neo-Marxists generally conceptualize the role of the media and television in particular as that of presenting a relatively inconsistent and contradictory picture of contemporary society.
They believe the media do not succeed in obtaining the consensus of all members of the society but are forced to permit a certain amount of negotiation between dominant and less dominant ideologies. 
At the same time, as Hall emphasizes, the possibilities for real opposition to the dominant viewpoint are limited.
The Media Culture Paradigm and Audience Response
Previous theories of the media perceived the audience as either accepting or rejecting a given message, but the media culture paradigm generally sees members of the audience as interpreting or negotiating its meanings.
Because members of the audience may come from social groups whose interpretations of events are at odds with the way those events are interpreted in the media, the audience's interpretation of a particular media text represents a "negotiation" between their views and those presented in the text. 