5 A CIVILIZATION FROM UNDER
For the most part we shall be too busy doing the work that lies ready to our hands, to let impatience for visibly great progress vex us too much; but surely, since we are servants of a Cause, hope must be ever with us, and sometimes perhaps it will so quicken our vision that it will outrun the slow lapse of time and show us the victorious days when millions of those who now sit in darkness will be enlightened by an Art made by the people and for the people, a joy to the maker and the user.
William Morris, The Beauty of Life.
Certain general problems connected with the social functions of the artist tend to be neglected because they are not practical problems of design in relation to particular objects or particular industries. 
In the ordinary course of discussion we simplify the factors involved. 
We think of the object to be designed¡ªsomething simple and comprehensible enough. We think of the designer¡ªan individual who has to be brought into relation with this object. 
We think of the manufacturer, again as an individual who has to be persuaded to employ the designer; and perhaps, if we are considerate enough, we think of the consumer, again as an individual who has to be persuaded to buy the object designed. 
It then looks like a simple series of links which have only to be made aware of each other to form an unbroken chain.
But it is not so simple in reality. 
Just as the economists find that their economic man¡ªthe Robinson Crusoe of the textbooks¡ªhas little or no correspondence to the mass-man of modern society, so we discover that our designer, our manufacturer and our consumer cannot be considered as isolated units. 
They are all part of a social complex which cannot be dismantled¡ªwhich adds up to something more than the sum of its component units.
In the end it turns out that we are not dealing with single or simple units of any kind, but with social groups, vocational groups, national groups, and in general with what we call psychological or ideological factors¡ªhabits and fashions which have their roots in tradition, in superstition, in the unconscious levels of the human personality.
It may all be expressed in the old proverb: ¡®You may take a horse to the trough, but you cannot make him drink.¡¯ 
All our efforts to improve design are useless unless we can persuade the public to adopt them. But that does not express the real necessity. 
We do not persuade the horse to drink; it drinks when it is thirsty. 
There must arise in the public, therefore, a natural appetite for things of good design. 
That appetite must exist as a normal state of health.
Now the dogma to which I cling, and for which I could if necessary offer psychological and biological evidence, is that the instinct for what we call good design is an innate possession of every unspoilt human being. 
It is one of the ironies of history that all the cycles of civilization still leave the savage and the peasant in possession of the surest instinct for the fundamentally right plastic forms. 
These primitives have not got what we call the brains to design a motor-car or a seaside pavilion, but they never fail to make a good job of a bowl or a basket, a blanket or a boat.
It is logical to conclude, therefore, that it is all a question of education¡ªthat if we can bring up our children in such a way that their taste is not corrupted, then this natural instinct for good design will have free play and gradually the whole taste of our time and country will be purified.
A right system of education is, admittedly, going to be one of the principal agents of reform, but the moment you approach this aspect of the problem with any practical intention, you encounter overwhelming difficulties. 
It is not a question of squeezing in an extra hour for art, or of making handicraft a compulsory instead of an optional subject; it is not even a question of finding teachers with the necessary qualifications. 
If we are going to solve the problem in this way we shall be faced with the necessity of revising the curricula at every stage of the educational system, because not only must we secure time and opportunity for the positive teaching of good design, but we must also make sure that no negative and frustrating tendencies exist elsewhere in the educational system. 
In other words, it is no good developing the creative and appreciative exercise of the aesthetic impulse in the child if at the same time in some other direction our methods of teaching are inhibiting and deforming this impulse. 
The whole balance of education, as between intellectual and instinctive activity, must be redressed. 
Let us frankly face the fact that the joyful expression of rhythm and harmony and colour has nothing whatever to do with logic, reason and memory and the rest of our intellectual fetishes. 
I am not an anti-intellectualist. I do not say that we had better trust to our instincts in all the affairs of life. 
But I do say that our educational system is grossly overweighted with intellectual aims; that this rationalization of the child has a stultifying effect on its aesthetic impulse and is directly responsible for the triumph of ugliness in our age. 
But the educational difficulties do not end with that immense problem. 
We may educate the child in school, but outside the school another educational process goes on all the time¡ªthe influence of the child¡¯s environment. 
There is no good purpose in developing the creative and appreciative impulses in the child if at the same time we compel it to inhabit ugly schools, to go home through ugly streets and to live in an ugly house surrounded by ugly objects. 
And so, insensibly we are led to the wider social problem. 
Education alone will not suffice, because education can only be partial and is perhaps impossible in the chaos of ugliness which the industrial age has created.
It is such considerations as these which may well lead to the conclusion that no good can be done in this sphere unless and until the social system is changed. 
That seems to be the logical and inevitable conclusion to which we are driven. 
But at the same time we have to guard against the assumption that we have only to change the social system to secure our aims.
Any large international exhibition is very instructive in this respect. 
There we see displayed side by side the industrial art of all the countries of the world. 
It is possible to criticize the display and say that one or another pavilion does not represent the best that a particular nation is capable of. 
But in any case enough will be seen to establish certain general conclusions of a negative kind. 
It is quite impossible to find any law of correspondence between the artistic level of the products of the countries represented and their social or political institutions. 
It is not possible to say that obviously the totalitarian states are making a better job of industrial design than the democratic states, nor apparently to make any correlations between art and politics. 
The best designs of all, perhaps, come from the small democratic but still capitalist states of Holland, Sweden and Finland. 
But though we might quarrel in detail about the relative merits of the various national exhibits in such an exhibition, I think we should all agree on the point I am concerned to make: that no particular social system¡ªcommunism, fascism or capitalism¡ªwill necessarily of itself guarantee good design in objects of daily use.
It is simple enough to trace many of the inartistic and decadent qualities in the things we make and use to the prevailing industrial system. 
The material conditions of poverty which many people support throughout their lives, the lack of leisure and consequential dullness and ignorance¡ªthese are the social aspects of the system which prevent any element of quality or discrimination entering into daily life. 
It is also possible to argue that the very system in its actual mechanism also prevents the emergence of quality¡ªby the division of labour, mass methods of production, economies in material demanded by the universal profit motive. 
But in fairness it must be pointed out that the system, even under its present economic motivation, can and does produce many objects which have aesthetic qualities, and that we may fail to perceive these qualities because of our antiindustrial prejudices. 
I refer to the aeroplanes and motor-cars and other typical products of the modern industrial system which are by no means devoid of those elements of beauty which we find in classical art. 
I do not wish to insist on this aspect of the question, but it should serve to warn us that there is no necessary connection between the economic and even the ethical characteristics of an industrial system and the aesthetic merits of the products of that system.
Let us turn for a moment to the positive evidence offered by the case of Russia. 
In one vast industrial area, amounting to one-sixth of the world, the old economic system has been destroyed by revolution and a new economic system has been established which gradually eliminated the profit motive and gave the workers of Russia indirect control of the processes of production. 
The technical features of capitalist production remain, and have even been intensified. 
Division of labour and mass production remain. 
There is still little leisure, and though there is no longer acute poverty, there is no great abundance. 
It is still an economy of scarcity, and it is still a money economy. 
Workers are paid wages according to the kind and amount of work they do, and the more they produce the more they are paid.
It is not necessary for me to go into all the details of the Soviet system; the very act of presenting them might arouse controversy. 
The most general and most significant feature of the whole Soviet economy, distinguishing it from ours and from every other system in the world, is that it is centrally controlled for the total benefit of the people. 
This centralization means not only that the kind and quantity of goods are planned on a national scale, but also that there is every possibility of controlling the quality. 
And great efforts are made to this end. 
Artists and designers are organized in co-operatives, and their services are placed at the disposal of the soviets and factories. 
We all know what a great part museums and exhibitions play in the social life of the country, and even more direct encouragement is given to artists. 
¡®Annually [to quote one authority] the Council of People¡¯s Commissars now offers monetary awards to men and women who have attained distinction in the arts. 
In 1941 these awards embraced music, painting, sculpture, architecture, theatre, opera, dramatic writing, ballet, motion pictures, fiction, poetry, literary criticism. 
In each division three to five artists receive a first award of 100,000 roubles each, and from three to ten a second award of half that sum.¡¯ 
Such a deliberate promotion of culture continues to the present day.
From all this it would seem that Russia must be an earthly paradise for the artist, and undoubtedly the artist is treated with more respect in Russia than anywhere else in the world. 
Let me quote one more witness ¡ª a well-known American sculptress, Emma Lu Davis:
¡®In the Spring of 1935 I went to Russia. 
I wanted to see how the artists were organized over there, how they were utilized in the scheme of life, and how socialized patronage affected the arts. 
I found that from an economic-social standpoint the Soviet artist enjoys the happiest situation in the world; as a trade union member he enjoys protection and social security, he never lacks employment, and building and decorative projects are broad enough to include all varieties of work¡ªexcept good work.