The Oxford handbook of Cognitive Linguistics is, with certain qualifications elaborated on below, an impressively comprehensive single-volume overview of the research paradigm known as Cognitive Linguistics.
Cognitive Linguistics as a movement has its origins in the research programmes associated most notably with scholars such as Gilles Fauconnier, George Lakoff, Ronald Langacker and Leonard Talmy. Its roots emerged in work that began to appear in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Cognitive Linguistics is distinct from other movements in linguistics, both formalist and functionalist, in two respects.
Firstly, it takes seriously the cognitive underpinnings of language, the so-called cognitive commitment (Lakoff 1990).
Cognitive linguists attempt to describe and model language in the light of convergent evidence from cognitive and, increasingly, brain sciences.
Secondly, cognitive linguists subscribe to a generalisation commitment: a commitment to describing the nature and principles that constitute linguistic knowledge as an outcome of general cognitive abilities (see Lakoff 1990) ¨C rather than viewing language as constituting, for instance, a wholly distinct encapsulated module of mind.
Cognitive Linguistics, whilst functionalist in spirit, embraces the need for descriptive adequacy and rigour.
This has resulted in an impressive battery of technical and descriptive formalisms (see Evans &amp; Green 2006 for a review, and Evans 2007 for a glossary of the technical language employed).
Cognitive linguists have typically adopted a number of distinct (although complementary) foci. Some have been exercised by the study of language structure and organisation.
This constitutes a sub-branch of Cognitive Linguistics sometimes referred to as Cognitive Approaches to Grammar.
Notable exemplars include Lakoff (1987, case study 3), Langacker (e.g. 1987, 1999, 2008), Goldberg (1995, 2006), Talmy (e.g. 2000) and Croft (2002).
Others have employed language as a means of studying aspects of conceptual organisation and structure. The study of aspects of the mind, such as knowledge representation and meaning construction, employing language as a lens for doing so, is sometimes referred to as Cognitive Semantics.
Notable exemplars include Lakoff &amp; Johnson (1980, 1999), Fauconnier (1985) and Fauconnier &amp; Turner (2002).
A further sub-branch relates to the study of word meanings, sometimes referred to as Cognitive Lexical Semantics. Notable exemplars include Geeraerts (1997), Tyler &amp; Evans (2003) and Evans (2004).
Finally, some scholars have attempted to integrate the study of all three areas. A notable recent example is Evans (to appear).
Since the 1990s, the rise and take-up of Cognitive Linguistics has been both rapid and inexorable.
At the time of writing, Cognitive Linguistics is arguably the most rapidly expanding perspective within the discipline of linguistics, and exerts an increasing influence in many sub-branches of linguistics (including discourse analysis, pragmatics, semantics, sociolinguistics, stylistics and syntax) as well as cognate and related disciplines and sub-disciplines in the cognitive and social sciences and the humanities.
One symptom of this success is the range of textbooks and collections of readings that now abound (e.g. Lee 2001, Croft &amp; Cruse 2004, Evans &amp; Green 2006, Evans 2007, Evans, Bergen &amp; Zinken 2007).
However, the present Handbook is by far the most wide-ranging and, in certain key respects (e.g. in terms of authority and scope), the most impressive work of reference yet to appear that addresses research within the Cognitive Linguistics movement.
Running to 1334 pages, the Handbook is certainly the longest single-volume work in the field, and can claim with some credibility to be more fully representative of the Cognitive Linguistics movement and its various spheres of influence than earlier overview works.
The Handbook consists of forty-nine specially commissioned chapters, divided into six thematically arranged parts, written by leading experts in Cognitive Linguistics and/or related areas of enquiry.
Each chapter provides a synthesis of a particular issue, topic or area that directly concerns or bears on some aspect of Cognitive Linguistics.
As such, each chapter gives an introductory overview of central aspects of the findings, theories and/or methodologies relating to the specific issue or area addressed.
The level of complexity and familiarity assumed of linguistics and/or various aspects of Cognitive Linguistics means that the chapters are pitched at the level of the practitioner rather than the neophyte. Hence, the Handbook is likely to be less helpful to those hoping for an introductory primer in Cognitive Linguistics, despite the editors¡¯ suggestion to the contrary in their introductory article (¡®Introducing Cognitive Linguistics¡¯).
This in no way, however, detracts from the overall achievement of the Handbook, which performs an important service to the research community in synthesising and presenting, in bite-sized chunks, ideas relating to many of the key theoretical constructs and a number of the theories that populate Cognitive Linguistics, and phenomena addressed by researchers directly working in Cognitive Linguistics or related areas and disciplines.
For introductory overviews more suitable for the neophyte, see Croft &amp; Cruse (2004) or Evans &amp; Green (2006), the latter being the more comprehensive introductory text.
Collections of representative examples of primary literature in Cognitive Linguistics can be found, for example, in Evans, Bergen &amp; Zinken (2007).
While the Handbook constitutes a significant resource that will be staple reading for all cognitive linguists, as well as those interested in the Cognitive Linguistics enterprise, the book nevertheless, and perhaps inevitably in a work of this scope, manifests several drawbacks. I discuss two below.
These relate to (i) its organisation and (ii) its conceptualisation, i.e. the way Cognitive Linguistics is conceived as it emerges through the selection of topics covered and their arrangement.
I briefly elaborate on each of these points, before expanding in more detail.
The Handbook arguably exhibits something of a lack of balance in its treatment of topics and theories relating to two of the main sub-branches of Cognitive Linguistics: Cognitive Semantics and Cognitive Approaches to Grammar.
Overall, there is a greater weighting, in terms of number of chapters and topics selected, given to Cognitive Approaches to Grammar.
While this is not in itself problematic, for a volume that aspires to provide full coverage of the enterprise, the Handbook is less fully representative than it might otherwise have been.
This situation appears to be a consequence of the perspective adopted by the editors in terms of the nature and central concerns of Cognitive Linguistics as an enterprise, as advocated in their introductory chapter, as I discuss later.
Secondly, the structure and organisation of the Handbook gives rise to a view of Cognitive Linguistics as being perhaps more dislocated and fragmented than it actually is.
This, I suggest, is due to lacunae in topics treated.
In particular, there are no chapters that directly address the key commitments and guiding principles that make a particular account ¡®cognitive linguistic¡¯, as opposed to something else.
For instance, one of the things that a reader might reasonably expect a volume of this size and scope to provide is specific guidance as to what makes Cognitive Linguistics a self-conscious and coherent intellectual, theoretical and methodological enterprise.
In short, what is it that makes a given theory or descriptive account cognitive linguistic? As the overwhelming majority of chapters focus much more narrowly on theoretical constructs, phenomena of enquiry or the interrelationships between Cognitive Linguistics and other areas, such a chapter-length characterisation would appear to be indispensable.
Yet, apart from a brief section on the theoretical perspective of Cognitive Linguistics in the introductory chapter, the Handbook does not provide explicit guidance on this in a way that is easily located.
Moreover, the framing of Cognitive Linguistics in the introductory chapter as an enterprise which has ¡®not yet stabilized into a single uniform theory¡¯ (4), and repeated references to this apparent drawback of the enterprise throughout the introduction, potentially give rise to the (incorrect) impression that Cognitive Linguistics is less coherent than it actually is.
For many scholars who self-describe themselves as being cognitive linguists (and I include myself here), one of the strengths of Cognitive Linguistics is exactly that it constitutes an enterprise, consisting of a range of distinct theories and methodologies, rather than being subject to the ex cathedra pronouncements of a single theoretical authority.
What makes something cognitive linguistic concerns a number of shared assumptions and corresponding methodological practices.
While these do emerge at various points in the forty-nine chapters in piecemeal fashion, there is no systematic or coherent introduction or overview.
One of the central issues that a work such as this might be expected to address is precisely the tenets and guiding assumptions that inform the scholarship of practising cognitive linguists.
The reader is left to infer what makes the enterprise a unified intellectual movement from the abbreviated comments in the various chapters which allude to particular assumptions of Cognitive Linguistics, before moving on to the issue being addressed in the chapter.
There are two chapters which contrast Cognitive Linguistics with functional and formal (or autonomous) linguistics.
And these are helpful. But in reading the Handbook, I could not help but wonder if there would not have been benefit in more explicit framing of the range of theoretical constructs, issues and topics covered by the various chapters.
This could have been achieved with a chapter (or chapters) addressing the key commitments that characterise any given theory or approach to a particular linguistic and/or conceptual phenomenon as being cognitive linguistic.
The Handbook is organised into six substantive parts.
Part I, entitled ¡®Basic concepts¡¯, is the longest, with fifteen chapters.
This part of the book provides overview articles which address both theory-specific and theorygeneral constructs, including construal, schematicity, prototype theory, radial categories, frames, idealised cognitive models, domains, metaphor, metonymy, image schemas, mental spaces, conceptual integration and so on.
Part I also includes chapters relating to specific theoretical perspectives widely assumed in Cognitive Linguistics, such as experientalism, and also features chapters relating to particular phenomena that have either been widely invoked in cognitive linguistic studies, such as iconicity, or which have received distinctive cognitive linguistic treatments, such as force dynamics and attentional phenomena.
In addition, part I also includes a chapter on a specific area of enquiry, spatial semantics, and some of the theoretical constructs and descriptions of that area that are representative of cognitive linguistic accounts.
Part I of the Handbook is envisaged, according to the editors, as providing a grounding in the basic concepts of Cognitive Linguistics, which are deployed, in various ways, in later sections of the Handbook.
Yet, while the individual chapters in this, and indeed other parts of the Handbook, are generally written to a consistently high standard, the contents of part I provide a somewhat heterogeneous collection of topics.
In particular, it is not entirely clear what the status is of the various topics qua ¡®basic concepts¡¯.
While some of the chapters in part I clearly address theoretical constructs that have the status of being ¡®basic¡¯, in the sense of foundational within one or more specific theories in Cognitive Linguistics, others are not ¡®basic¡¯ in this sense.
For instance, Leonard Talmy¡¯s and Jordan Zlatev¡¯s chapters on ¡®Attentional phenomena¡¯ and ¡®Spatial semantics¡¯ provide cognitive linguistic characterisations of these areas, and might have fitted better elsewhere in the Handbook, for instance, in a part entitled ¡®Semantic and conceptual phenomena¡¯ ¨C although no such part actually exists in the Handbook as it stands.
Another example concerns the first chapter in part I, by Tim Rohrer, which deals with ¡®Embodiment and experientialism¡¯. There is no dispute as to the importance of the issues addressed in this chapter, which imbues Cognitive Linguistics, in part, with its distinctive flavour and perspective.
The perspective taken by cognitive linguists on the relationship between embodiment, knowledge representation and socio-physical experience has given rise to a perspective known as Experiential Realism (see Lakoff &amp; Johnson 1980, Lakoff 1987).
This is a philosophical perspective which engenders a worldview, rather than being a theoretical construct in the same way that notions such as domain, frame, idealised cognitive model and so on are theoretical constructs.
The foundational theoretical constructs are moreover addressed unevenly.
For instance, the theoretical constructs of schematicity and entrenchment, both central to Langacker¡¯s Cognitive Grammar, each receive chapter-length treatments. However, the theoretical construct of the domain, which is arguably just as central to Langacker¡¯s theory, is treated in a chapter alongside the theoretical constructs of semantic frame and idealised cognitive model (each associated with theories developed by Charles Fillmore and George Lakoff, respectively).