¡°We Are Not Equipped to Answer¡± 
What of the future?
Over the course of a generation the Holocaust has moved from the margins to the center of American Jewish consciousness; from an event that rarely appeared in American public discourse to one that is omnipresent. 
Will the Holocaust, one or two generations down the road, loom as large as it does now? 
Will its centrality prove short-lived? 
These aren't questions that anyone can answer with confidence, but looking at the idea of collective memory in general, and at what's happened so far with the memory of the Holocaust in particular, may offer a few clues.
Some collective memories are very longlived the Battle of Kosovo for Serbs, the expulsion of 1492 for Sephardic Jews. 
The reason that these memories endured for centuries is that the conditions they symbolized also endured: foreign oppression, foreign exile. 
Long-lived memories are most characteristic of stable, relatively unchanging societies. 
When we speak of collective memory, we often forget that we¡¯re employing a metaphoran organic metaphor that makes an analogy between the memory of an individual and that of a community. 
The metaphor works best when we¡¯re speaking of an organic (traditional, stable, homogeneous) community in which consciousness, like social reality, changes slowly. 
When Maurice Halbwachs first advanced the idea of collective memory in the 1920s, the great French medievalist Marc Bloch, who was suspicious of organic metaphors for society, nevertheless thought it might be usefully applied to such things as a peasant grandparent, grandchild on knee, passing on rural traditions. 
A very organic image. 
How appropriate the metaphor is for the very inorganic societies of the late twentieth century (fragmented rather than homogeneous, rapidly changing rather than stable, the principal modes of communication electronic rather than face to face) seems to me questionable.
The life expectancy of memories in today¡¯s society appears greatly diminished. 
With the circumstances of our lives changing as rapidly as they do, it is the rare memory that can connect with an unchanging condition. 
Nowhere is this more true than in the United States, that notoriously most "now¡± and amnesiac of nations. 
Years ago, the Fourth of July was a day when the community gathered to hear patriotic speeches. 
When was the last time you went to a patriotic speech on the Fourth of July? 
When was the last time you even thought about the Declaration of Independence, which it commemorates, on that day? 
¡°The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget what they did here.¡± 
But of course Lincoln got it backward. 
His words at Gettysburg still (perhaps, sometimes) resonate; not one American in a hundred has the faintest notion of the significance of the Battle of Gettysburg, or who won it. 
November 11 used to be Armistice Day, on which we paid homage to a memory; now it¡¯s Veterans Day, on which we pay homage to an interest group. 
Some of my colleagues continue to be shocked that incoming freshmen know nothing of such ¡°ancient history¡± as the Vietnam War and Watergate. 
My colleagues acknowledge grudgingly, because it makes them feel old that these things happened before the students were born, but protest that the kids¡¯ parents lived through them; ¡°they must have told them about it¡±! Maybe the parents did, but the kids didn¡¯t (as kids don¡¯t) listen. 
We¡¯re a long way from traditional notions of the transmission of collective memories, let alone the sort that endure for centuries.
Whether or not we want to call it memory, consciousness of the Holocaust has grown enormously over the last generation most notably among American Jews, more diffusely among all Americans. 
What does the process by which that growth took place suggest about ¡°the future of the Holocaust¡±?
Much of the original impetus behind the Jewish drive for centering the Holocaust is, if not spent, at least declining in power. 
Those who once complained, with justification, that the Holocaust had been neglected, and that it was necessary to counteract that neglect, have surely succeeded in their task, and the complaint no longer has any force. 
As we¡¯ve seen, Holocaust awareness was promoted to mobilize support for a beleaguered Israel, pictured as being in a kind of pre-Holocaust danger. 
Such arguments are rarely heard anymore and would be unlikely to attract many adherents if they were heard. 
Though the chances for a mutually satisfactory accommodation between Israelis and Palestinians remain in doubt, it¡¯s hard to imagine the circumstances in which Israel¡¯s problems will summon up images of the Holocaust. 
In the early seventies there was a good deal of talk about a rampant ¡°new anti-Semitism¡± in America, of the need to remind both Jews and gentiles of the Holocaust in order to combat it. 
I¡¯ve argued that at the time claims about a new anti-Semitism were nonsense; certainly they¡¯re nonsense today. 
While anti-Semites will probably always be with us, their influence, insignificant twenty-five years ago, is even more insignificant now.
A number of those who took the lead in promoting Holocaust awareness were moved by the belief that it called for a reorientation of Jewish religious belief and practice. 
This view has failed to win much support, and its power seems to be waning. 
Rabbi Irving Greenberg was perhaps the single most influential figure in centering the Holocaust in Jewish and general American consciousness, through the private commemorative activities he sponsored and through his service as director of President Carter¡¯s Commission on the Holocaust. 
For Greenberg, as we¡¯ve seen, the Holocaust was a ¡°revelational event¡± on a par with receiving the Torah at Mount Sinai. 
As Jews ritually eat matzo to commemorate the Exodus, he urged them to ritually eat rotten potato peelings to commemorate the Holocaust. 
Greenberg argued that just as the destruction of the Temple brought forth the new institution of the synagogue, so the destruction of European Jewry was bringing forth another new religious institution, the Holocaust museum. 
But most of the Jewish religious establishment has resisted the efforts of Greenberg, Emil Fackenheim, and others who sought to win for the Holocaust a major place in formal Jewish liturgy and theology. 
For Ismar Schorsch, head of the Jewish Theological Seminary (Conservative), the Holocaust was ¡°a theological ¡®black hole¡¯ so dense that it fails to emit even a single ray of light. 
A collapsed star can never serve as a source of illumination.¡± 
Representatives of other segments of American Judaism have been equally opposed to seeing the Holocaust centered in Jewish religious belief, and nowadays there are few pressing this cause. 
In a broad sense the Holocaust remains sacred in American ¡°folk Judaism¡±, especially among the less observant, and this is likely to continue in the short term. 
Whether this will endure without formal religious institutionalization is hard to say.
The argument for raising Holocaust consciousness that has been advanced with the greatest urgency is, by any sober evaluation, the most absurd: the alleged necessity of responding to the tiny band of cranks, kooks, and misfits who deny that the Holocaust took place. 
Concern about the ¡°growing influence¡± of this corporal¡¯s guard was widespread for a time, but now seems to be abating.
The ¡°star¡± of American Holocaust denial is Arthur Butz, an associate professor of electrical engineering at Northwestern University, who in 1976 arranged the private publication of?The Hoax of the Twentieth Century: The Case Against the Presumed Extermination of European Jewry.?
A few years later the Institute for Historical Review was established in California; its principal activity was publishing the Journal of Historical Review, a slender quarterly devoted to exposing ¡°the myth of the six million¡±. 
The institute rented the mailing list of the unsuspecting Organization of American Historians, and sent sample copies of its journal to the organization¡¯s twelve thousand members, garnering some publicity from the resulting reaction. 
More publicity came when its offer of a $50,000 reward for anyone who could prove any Jews were gassed at Auschwitz was taken up by Mel Mermelstein, a survivor of that camp; after bringing a lawsuit, he collected. 
The deniers¡¯ most successful publicity coup was their clever idea of sending college newspapers advertisements calling for ¡°open debate¡± on the Holocaust. 
A series of fusses were occasioned by several undergraduate editors¡¯ notion that rejecting the ads raised ¡°First Amendment issues¡±. 
This kept the pot boiling, though in no case known to me was the Holocaust itself ever debated on campuses; rather, it was a question of whether boycott or exposure was the best strategy for dealing with these screwballs.
So far as one can tell, it was only fellow screwballs that they ever attracted: John Hinckley, who shot President Reagan, was a denier; so was Eric Rudolph, at this writing wanted for the murder of a guard at an abortion clinic; so was the crazed chess genius Bobby Fischer.
The activities of these fruitcakes were irritating, indeed infuriating especially, though not exclusively, to survivors. 
Some insisted that the deniers should be taken more seriously, but since there was no evidence that they¡¯d had the slightest influence, it was hard to say?why?one should do so. 
Then seemingly powerful evidence of the deniers¡¯ influence was supplied by a public opinion poll conducted for the American Jewish Committee by the Roper Organization. 
Its results were announced on the eve of the opening of the Washington Holocaust Museum in 1993. 
Twenty-two percent of the public, according to the poll, doubted that the Holocaust had really occurred. 
¡°What have we done? 
Twenty-two percent... oh, my God,¡± said Elie Wieselan understandable reaction to this astonishing statistic, and one echoed in the press across the country. 
Coming on the eve of the museum opening, the poll finding was cited in newspaper editorials and other commentaries as the decisive argument for its indispensability, an unanswerable response to those who had doubted that such a museum belonged in the United States. 
Deborah Lipstadt¡¯s Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory arrived in bookstores at the same time as the poll results were announced. 
It was the rare review of Lipstadt¡¯s book that didn¡¯t cite the poll as proof that the deniers had indeed had the success Lipstadt attributed to them.
For the next several months the growing menace of the deniers and the evidence of their astonishing influence offered by the Roper poll were repeatedly discussed. 
The poll results were said to underscore the importance not only of the Washington museum but of Spielberg¡¯s Schindler¡¯s List in checking the denier menace. 
Steven Spielberg himself said that he had feared, during the making of the movie, that if he made any mistakes, it would help the deniers. 
All of this coincided with the height of the onslaught against American universities as hotbeds of nihilism and relativism. 
Lipstadt, in her book, claimed that the willingness of campus editors to run deniers¡¯ advertisements was evidence of the strength of postmodernism and deconstructionism in the universities. 
This theme was eagerly picked up by conservative commentators still another lesson, though this time not of the Holocaust but of its denial. 
(In fact, the student editors in question had not been immersing themselves in Foucault and Derrida, but instead reading, somewhat carelessly, those ¡°dead white males¡± Thomas Jefferson and John Stuart Mill, and concluding that their principles required making a place in the marketplace of ideas for the deniers.)
It was a different sort of marketplace that ¡°deconstructed¡± the Roper poll results. 
Officials of the Gallup polling organization Roper¡¯s main competitor were struck by the fact that the question that produced the astonishing 22 percent who doubted the Holocaust had, against all the rules of survey research, been framed in an extraordinarily confusing way: ¡°Does it seem possible or does it seem impossible to you that the Nazi extermination of the Jews never happened.¡± 
Seizing this opportunity to show up a rival¡¯s incompetence, the Gallup people asked one sample group the original Roper question and presented another group with a straightforward version. 
The version containing the double negative again produced dramatically high results.