Part II From the Bog and Sand of Versailles to the Tennis Court
The Monarchs¡¯ Revolution
Puritans as Democrats
The Reign of Etiquette
Cross Section£º
The View from London Around 1715
The Opulent Eye
The Encyclopedic Century
Cross Section£º
The View from Weimar Around 1790
The Forgotten Troop
The Monarchs¡¯ Revolution
ONE REVOLUTION calls forth another. 
When the Protestant Revolution of the 16C had done its best and its worst while destroying unified Christendom, its worst -namely the protracted war of sects - hastened the Monarchical Revolution of the 17th. 
Its twofold Idea was ¡°monarch-and-nation¡± and its double goal was stability and peace. 
The sects had challenged or broken authority everywhere; some means must be found to restore order through a new loyalty and a new symbol.
The symbol was monarch, not king. 
There had been kings in Western Europe for a thousand years, but no matter what their ambition had been, they had remained ¡°first among equals¡± rather than ¡°one and only¡±. 
Their peers, the great nobles, had endlessly challenged or infringed their authority, fought to usurp their tide, and ruled like kings large parts of the country. Each was the legitimate force in his own county or dukedom. 
As a result boundaries were always shifting. 
What was France? Burgundy? Italy? Austria? Savoy? Wholes or parts, they were at the mercy of rulers seeking wealth and power by conquering provinces not only nearby but far afield. 
France and Spain fought in Italy to annex some piece of it, just as the English had done in France for centuries. 
Indeed, for 400 years after their departure, the English in their coronation service continued to claim France as part of the king¡¯s realm and to sport the lilies of France on the English coat of arms. 
Within each country, strong nobles kept enlisting the aid of some foreign king to dislodge their own and take his place. 
The idea of a nation, a continuous, stable territory with an increasingly homogeneous population, was hardly clear in theory, let alone in practice.
Nation implies the nation-state, the one source of authority, just as monarch when compared to king means undisputed rule by one alone. 
This double development--king into monarch, realm into nation - is the mark of the revolution, in keeping with the definition given earlier (<3): a violent transfer of power and property in the name of an idea.
This change in the meaning of kingship and country did not take place all at once throughout Europe. 
Local traditions and the chances of war and of character in kings account for the variations of speed and of phase that made this revolution take about 200 years. 
If this seems odd for ¡°a revolution¡±, remember that revolution is a process not an event. 
We think of the French Revolution in capsule form -1789 to '94, but what occurred then had antecedents in polemics and practice, and the Idea of the outbreak--the rights of man, equality, suffrage, and ¡°no king¡± - took 100 years to be finally accepted, either in France or among the other western nations (548; 587>).
As for the idea of the nation-state, it is still in the future for some peoples in various parts of the world. 
Their struggles are a remote consequence of the revolutionary monarch-and-nation idea, as well as a paradox in our time, when kings are few and the nation as a form is falling apart in the countries that first made it a reality (774-776>).
The story of that accomplishment is long and complicated and need not occupy us at length. A reminder of a few facts will suffice to show the pattern.
In 15C Spain, the union of the kingdoms of Aragon and Castile through the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella was enhanced by the conquest of Granada and the expulsion or assimilation of the Moors and the Jews. 
The local assemblies were gradually subdued to the central power, the very test of monarchy. 
In the 16C Portugal came under Spanish rule but broke away after a half century, making two nations in the peninsula.
In England, again in the late 15C, the Wars of the Roses (coalitions of great lords) came to an end, also by a marriage and a victory, and the first two Tudors ruled almost as monarchs. 
Henry VIII had to face one rebellion, and by Elizabeth¡¯s time internal troubles returned and weakened autocratic rule.
Tried again by Charles I it collapsed in the Civil Wars (263>). 
Not until the Glorious Revolution of 1688 (no revolution but a glorious compromise) was the English monarchy a solid institution. 
Two failed attempts to overthrow it in the 18C showed its strength. 
Note in passing that after 1066 the English never had a line of English kings: William the Conqueror was Norman; the Plantagenets were French; the Tudors were Welsh; the Stuarts were Scots, and the Hanoverians, German. 
These shifts and turns no doubt helped Parliament to retain powers that a sustained monarchy might well have extinguished.
In Sweden, the Vasa family succeeded early in governing the entire Scandinavian region, and did not falter, despite the death of Gustavus Adolphus in the Thirty Years¡¯ War and the abdication of the wondrous Christina (<207). 
Poland in the late 16C was a nation in spirit and seemed to have a sole ruler, but unhappily he was an elective monarch, and one particularly hamstrung, because the nobles who chose him enjoyed each a veto on the acts of the law-making body. 
It was institutional anarchy and contradiction. 
The two semi-nations, Netherlands and Switzerland, created by the comprehensive treaty that ended the Thirty Years¡¯ War, managed their affairs without a monarch by schemes as composite as their group of provinces. 
Two larger, indefinite regions, known as Germany and Italy, were unable to overcome their past and seize the benefits of the revolution. 
They remained divided into small units for another 200 years, suffering the harm of division.
On hearing the words?absolute monarchy, one is likely to think of France and of Louis XIV in particular. There is truth and error in this association of ideas 
What is true is that for the concrete details of the monarch-and-nation scheme, 17C France is the place to look; it supplies them most fully, and well before Louis XIV. 
The French kings and their ministers from the 15C onward worked to control the nobles, to round out the territory, and by being careful about money to become independent. 
This last is the all-important requisite. 
A king is a monarch when he holds the monopoly of war, and this means money for a standing army. 
Money also confers the monopoly of justice, taxation, and coinage--all this made secure by a legion of civil servants to enforce the rules. 
These indispensables presuppose direction from a center. 
Monarchy implies centralization. 
Without it, the well-defined region called nation could not be a nation-state.
Its agents replace local authorities and govern as uniformly as possible. 
Thus bureaucracy is born or at least. 
The mastermind who set up such a system in France was Cardinal Richelieu, minister to Louis XIII for a quarter century. 
He did it in the teeth of plotting nobles and clerics bent on thwarting him. 
Dumas¡¯ Three Musketeers gives a good idea of Richelieu¡¯s corps of henchmen and spies and the hatred he and they incurred. 
One peculiar measure that was also needed had to do with an ancient cultural institution, the duel. 
Its prohibition goes back to the previous reign, when the annual toll of casualties in the pastime was high enough to alarm the Duke of Sully (<185). 
One might suppose that a king aiming at monarchy would rejoice. The bumptious and braggart who go in for dueling as a sport might as well dispose of one another. 
But of course, that breed might make up only half the participants, the other half being decent, peaceable subjects forced into fighting by the code of honor. 
And these, if killed or maimed, would be a loss to the country.
Conflicting interests were at stake: if monarchy promises law and order, all types of brawl must be forbidden, all disputes settled in court. 
But dueling exists because it settled matters that courts cannot take notice of--insults, offenses against dignity or against women or elders in one's family. 
When pride is high by reason of rank, honor can be compromised in a thousand ways and tolerating affronts is either cowardice or lack of self-respect.
Besides, a duel settled matters between individuals and is thus more rational than the blood feud that keeps two families (those of Romeo and Juliet come to mind) killing each other off after the original offense. 
With dueling not only is there an end, but the wiping out of the insult is accomplished not by stealth or ambush but according to rules under the supervision of seconds. 
Despite these advantages, dueling is seen today as not quite rational enough, although there are occasions - say, of unpunishable cruelty or injustice - that make one long for redress through single combat. 
Our enlightened century has in fact witnessed a return to a kind of blood feud. 
Instead of the family, it is the local clan or gang or sect. 
Schoolchildren are keen for it, and so are criminals, the Mafia, the inhabitants of Northern Ireland, Lebanon, Corsica, and other places at present known to all.
This vendetta-style warfare gives a measure of the force that monarchy tried to repress. 
It succeeded to some extent, but appeal to sword or pistol kept playing a part in political and cultural history. 
It killed Galois, the young mathematical genius; Pushkin, the first among Russian poets; Alexander Hamilton, the leading statesman of his generation. 
In modem France, from Armand Carrel, the political theorist of the 1820s, down to Clemenceau, the head of state a century later, duels put at risk the lives of a large number of statesmen and writers. 
It lasted democratically in the American West, later proving a boon to the movie industry.
The desire for self-vindication is deeply ingrained in western man. 
In the 17C it was called ¡°the point of honor¡±. 
Its moral force derived from medieval chivalry, which regarded the knight as the champion of all that is noble and fair and as an independent judge in his own cause. 
No monarch wanted his subjects to lose all of these qualities, and the ethos persisted. 
It implies loyalty, honesty, and courage, which remove or reduce the need for inspectors and written codes of ethics.
The sense of honor is of so fine and delicate a nature that it is only to be met with in minds which are naturally noble or cultivated by good examples and a refined education, as the mainspring of monarchy. 
¡ªSIR RICHARD STEELE (1713)
Honor lies in honest toil.
¡ªGROVER CLEVELAND, ACCEPTING THE PRESIDENTIAL NOMINATION (1892)
One also sees in the triumph of monarchism under Louis XIV the shift that Burckhardt pointed out, of the thirst for honor into ¡°honors¡± - tides, decorations, favors slight in themselves but of infinite value, such as being spoken to by the king before anyone else among a cluster of courtiers. 
Topping all these, honor for the nation was served by glorious action in war. 
Though muted in the late 20C, the popular response to a victorious general (or woman prime minister) is still the same. 
As for the love of tides and decorations, it has become the rage in the democracies - prizes for everything and everyone. 
Montesquieu miscalculated when he made virtue the mainspring of republics.
No king wanting to be monarch could succeed by means of soldiers and bureaucrats alone. 
Mere coercion would only produce a tyranny, and with tardy means of communication it could not last long. 
There must be wide consent, tangibly expressed in the form of money paid into the treasury.
The great sums required gave the edge to rulers of large territories that included prosperous cities. 
The artisans and merchants who lived there were the future monarch's natural allies in his rise to centralized power.