Chapter 3 Narrating the anti-conquest 
At times indeed the Company officials allowed the main slave depot in Cape Town to be used as a son of brothel. 
(Philip Curtin et al., African History (1978)) 
It is a relief to turn from these scenes of contention and disorder to notice the efforts that were made at this time [1793] by several colonists to improve the domestic animals of the country. 
(George M.Theal, A History of Southern Africa (1907))
The previous chapter introduced the eighteenth-century systematizing of nature as a European knowledge-building project that created a new kind of Eurocentered planetary consciousness. 
Blanketing the surface of the globe, it specified plants and animals in visual terms as discrete entities, subsuming and reassembling them in a finite, totalizing order of European making. 
Perhaps one should be more specific about the terms: ¡°European¡± in this instance refers above all to a network of literate Northern Europeans, mainly men from the lower levels of the aristocracy and the middle and upper levels of the bourgeoisie. 
¡°Nature¡± meant above all regions and ecosystems which were not dominated by ¡°Europeans,¡± while including many regions of the geographical entity known as Europe.
The project of natural history determined many sorts of social and signifying practices, of which travel and travel writing were among the most vital. 
For the purposes of this book, what is of chief interest is the mutual engagement between natural history and European economic and political expansionism. 
As I suggested above, natural history asserted an urban, lettered, male authority over the whole of the planet; it elaborated a rationalizing, extractive, dissociative understanding which overlaid functional, experiential relations among people, plants, and animals. 
In these respects, it figures a certain kind of global hegemony, notably one based on possession of land and resources rather than control over routes. 
At the same time, in and of itself, the system of nature as a descriptive paradigm was an utterly benign and abstract appropriation of the planet. 
Claiming no transformative potential whatsoever, it differed sharply from overtly imperial articulations of conquest, conversion, territorial appropriation, and enslavement. 
The system created, as I suggested above, a Utopian, innocent vision of European global authority, which I refer to as an anti-conquest.
The term is intended to emphasize the relational meaning of natural history, the extent to which it became meaningful specifically in contrast with an earlier imperial, and prebourgeois, European expansionist presence.
This chapter undertakes to illustrate more concretely the impact of natural history and global science on travel writing. 
Through a set of examples, I aim to suggest how natural history provided means for narrating inland travel and exploration aimed not at the discovery of trade routes, but at territorial surveillance, appropriation of resources, and administrative control. 
This discussion is intended to be read in conjunction with two subsequent chapters, which take up sentimental travel writing, the other main form of anti-conquest in this period. 
In travel literature, I argue, science and sentiment code the imperial frontier in the two eternally clashing and complementary languages of bourgeois subjectivity.
In what follows I examine a sequence of four North European travel books on southern Africa written across the eighteenth century and spanning what I have been calling the Linnaean watershed: Peter Kolb¡¯s The Present State of the Cape of Good Hope (Germany, 1719); Anders Sparrman¡¯s Voyage to the Cape of Good Hope (Sweden, 1775); William Paterson¡¯s Narrative of Four Voyages in the Land of the Hottentots and the Kaffirs (Britain, 1789), and John Barrow¡¯s Travels into the Interior of Southern Africa (Britain, 1801). 
My aim here is not to survey the extensive literature of travel on southern Africa in this period; rather, I have selected four texts that particularly illustrate the discursive impact of natural history and the new planetary consciousness. 
(A contrasting instance of southern African travel writing is taken up in the next chapter.) 
My observations coincide at a number of points with those of J.M. Coetzee in his 1988 study White Writing: On the Culture of Letters in South Africa. 
The opening chapters of this valuable book focus heavily on eighteenth- and nineteenth-century travel writing on South Africa, including the writers discussed here. 
Coetzee goes on to examine how European problematics of representation carry forward into nineteenth- and twentieth-century literature in South Africa, as I have tried to do for Spanish America in chapter 7 below.
The literature on the Cape of Good Hope is a particularly fruitful one for studying the discursive shifts in travel writing, for the Cape was one place where scientific travel, the momentum for inland expansion, and the shifting relations of contact these engendered, played themselves out conspicuously and dramatically. 
The ¡°great age¡± of scientific travel is usually associated with the South Sea expeditions of Cook, Bougainville, and others, first organized around the transit of Venus in 1768. 
These maritime expeditions indeed inaugurated the era of scientific travel, and scientific travel writing. 
But at the same time, they marked an end: the last great navigational phase of European exploration. Cook discovered and mapped the shores of the last uncharted continent, Australia. 
In a way, he set the stage for the new phase of inland exploration. 
The Cape of Good Hope was one of the few places in Africa where Northern Europeans had access to the continental interior. 
It was a magnet both for settlers and for explorers eager to make their mark. 
It was a place where interior colonization broke into open conflict with sea-oriented mercantilism, where competition among European nations was played out as warfare. 
In the early decades of the nineteenth century, as inland expansion proceeded, southern Africa was also to become a canonical test site for the civilizing mission in the labors of the London Missionary Society and their unmanageable star, David Livingstone.
Established in 1652 by the Dutch East India Company as a supply port for commercial ships, the Cape Colony proved a vital stopping-off point for European travelers of all kinds. 
Fresh meat was available from the indigenous Khoikhoi (¡°Hottentot¡±) population, while the Company grew fresh vegetables to combat scurvy, provided leisure, cared for sick sailors, supplied ships with healthy crewmembers, and so on. 
Vulnerable to attack and dependent on the indigenous cattle-herding population for fresh meat, the Company initially took pains to minimize its encroachment on the region and its exploitation of indigenous labor. 
A proposal to attempt enslaving the Khoikhoi in 1654 was rejected; slaves were procured initially from West Africa, then from Malay and Ceylon. 
Nevertheless, frontier conflict was immediate and constant (the first cross-racial murder recorded was in 1653), and intensified greatly in the 1670s as interior colonization by Europeans expanded as well.
Within a few years of founding the Cape Colony, the Dutch East India Company reluctantly agreed to grant a portion of the inhabitants the status of ¡°free burghers,¡± or independent farmers, and to allow them to wrest grazing and farming lands from the cattle-rearing indigenous peoples. 
This population of independent colonists grew slowly, largely out of the ranks of Company workers, stranded sailors, and African or Euroafrican women.
(Till 1685 there were no racial prohibitions on marriage; in 1685 marriages were outlawed between Europeans and Africans, but not between Europeans and persons of mixed blood.)
The settlers¡¯ numbers were substantially increased in 1689 by 150 Huguenot dissenters from Holland, who brought with them the Dutch Reformed Church. 
In 1699 the free burgher (Boer) population, the ancestors of today¡¯s Afrikaners, numbered just over 1,000 men, women, and children, owning an unspecified number of slaves. 
A century later, they were 17,000 plus 26,000 slaves. 
Today they number two million.
The outlines of today¡¯s Afrikaner agro-pastoral society ¡ª and today¡¯s South African race war ¡ª were thus already in place by 1700. 
The prison at Robben Island, where Nelson Mandela and the founders of the African National Congress were held during the 1960s, was established in 1657 for Hottentots ¡°who assaulted or robbed a burgher.¡± 
Largely outside the control of Company administration, and often at odds with the Company¡¯s interests, free burgher society developed along its own expansive lines, pressing its way inland, usually in conflict and occasionally in alliance with resident Khoikhoi chiefdoms. 
By force of horses (which indigenous Africans were forbidden by law to own), firearms (which European settlers were required by law to own), and strategic alliances among rival groups, the Europeans gradually overcame indigenous control and broke up local socioeconomic structures. 
Smallpox epidemics in 1713, 1755, and 1767 weakened the indigenous position. 
Gradually more and more Khoikhoi were forced into the role of subsistence laborers, herding the Boers¡¯ cattle rather than their own. 
By 1778 the new governor Von Plattenburg reported finding no autonomous Khoikhoi communities in the Cape Colony. 
Which is not, of course, to say that indigenous society and indigenous resistance to colonization ended here; both continued in forms which I will discuss further below.
From the beginning of their presence, Europeans in the Cape periodically mounted expeditions to explore the interior. 
One early object of interest, typical of the seventeenth century, was a mythical, gold-producing empire known as Monomatapa, akin to the El Dorado so long sought in the Americas. 
These early expeditions were not seen as having produced any discoveries of value; nor, in the era of navigational narrative, did they result in travel books. 
Not till the early eighteenth century did a European literature on southern Africa begin in earnest, one of the first major contributions being Peter Kolb¡¯s The Present State of the Cape of Good Hope.
PETER KOLB AND THE REVINDICATION OF THE HOTTENTOTS
Published in German in 1719, Kolb¡¯s book was translated into Dutch (1721), English (1731), and French (1741), and remained one of the main print sources on southern Africa through the first half of the century. 
Trained as a mathematician, Kolb was sent to the Cape in 1706 by a Prussian patron to carry out astronomical and meteorological research.
Though his mission was scientific, Kolb¡¯s account,like that of La Condamine in South America, was not. 
His book, like La Condamine¡¯s, contrasts in a number of respects with writings on the other side of the Linnaean watershed. 
It is devoted mainly, as the title page puts it, to ¡°A Particular ACCOUNT of the several NATIONS of the HOTTENTOTS: Their Religion, Government, Laws, Customs, Ceremonies, and Opinions; Their Art of War, Professions, Language, Genius, &amp;c together with A Short ACCOUNT of the DUTCH SETTLEMENT At the CAPE.¡± 
Kolb¡¯s account consists in the main of vivid ethnographic description of Khoikhoi society and lifeways in the traditional mode of manners and customs description. 
While his account is based on what Kolb describes as years of contact with many different groups of Hottentots, this contact itself is not narrated, nor are Kolb¡¯s travels in the interior. 
Kolb was writing before narrative paradigms for interior travel and exploration emerged in the last decades of the century. 
In 1719 navigational paradigms still prevailed: the only part of his experience Kolb does present as narrative is his six-month sea voyage to arrive at the Cape. 
In keeping with the conventions of navigational narrative, the trip is told as a survival story complete with storms, sickness, brackish water, and threat of attack on the high seas.
As its title promises, Kolb¡¯s account includes chapters on Khoikhoi forms of government, religion, ceremonies, domestic economy, cattle management, medicine, and so on. 
It is easy to vouch for the vividness of the description, but less easy to speak for its accuracy. 
Kolb declares he ¡°made it a Rule not to be believe any Thing I did not see of which a Sight could be had,¡± but in the very next sentence confirms having seen ¡°that Negroes are born White¡± and change color several days later! 
Nevertheless, his account is undeniably the most substantive source on the indigenous people of the Cape in this period. 
Here is a representative passage, to give something of the flavor of his writing: