Before proceeding further it is necessary to give some general indication of the kind of economic life that is led by Kachins and their Shan neighbours.
Map 1, which shows the general location of the Kachin Hills Area, shows also the geographical position of the other major categories among the Hill Tribes of Burma, namely the Karens, the Chins, the Nagas, the Palaungs, the Wa. 
In essence Burma comprises the drainage area of the Irrawaddy and the Lower Salween. 
The immediate neighbourhood of these great rivers and of their principal tributaries is low lying, flat and fertile; away from the rivers the country is generally mountainous, often precipitous. 
In the areas of heavy rain fall the normal vegetation cover is a dense semi-tropical monsoon forest; in the drier zones we find scrub, grassland and pine forest.
An important distinction here is that in the rainbelts a dense secondary growth of jungle quickly replaces any abandoned clearings. In the drier zones on the other hand virgin forest, once cleared, tends to revert to grass or coarse scrub. 
In the absence of stock animals or systematic manuring, the continuing fertility of the land is thus much higher in the rainbelts than in the dry zones.
Along the river valleys irrigated rice cultivation is easy and cart tracks are readily constructed, but in the mountains which separate the valleys the construction of either roads or rice terraces is a feat of major engineering. 
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that the technical and economic organisation of the hill-dwelling peoples is very different from that of the peoples of the valleys, nor is it very surprising that the hill peoples in different parts of Burma all resort to much the same kind of technical device to overcome the difficulties of their environment.
The contrast between the highlanders and the lowlanders is thus in the first place ecological. 
Even if the two categories of population spoke the same language one might well expect to find marked cultural differences between the two groups and, on analogy with countries such as Scotland and Northern Italy, one might also anticipate a jealous and mutual contempt between the rival parties. 
And such is the case. 
The only peculiarity about Burma is that the cultural contrast between the highlanders and the lowlanders is so very marked. 
The two groups do not share a common language and they share few traits of material culture. 
In matters of household and technical equipment, almost the only objects which are common to both groups in the Kachin Hills Area are such things as iron cooking-pans and tripods which both parties purchase from the Chinese. 
Yet this is understandable enough, for technological equipment is necessarily adjusted to the conditions of life, and the highland and lowland mode of living is sharply contrasted. 
When one comes to the aspects of culture which are of ¡°ritual, rather than "technical' significance matters are rather different. 
The dress of the highland males for example, is nearly everywhere a scruffy imitation of that of the local lowlander males, but women's dress is sharply contrasted as between highlanders and lowlanders and shows many regional variations among both groups. 
This sex difference is not without its sociological significance. 
It is one aspect of a theme that recurs throughout this book, namely that the highlander Kachins are constantly subject to contra dictory pressures both to imitate and to oppose their valley dwelling neighbours. 
Incidentally much of the ethnography of Burma has been written by people who have assumed that differences of dress denotes differences of ¡®race¡¯! 
On this basis members of more than a dozen ¡®races¡¯ turn up at Namhkam market in the Northern Shan States every five days.
But in this chapter we are concerned with ecology, not with politics or race. 
Briefly the technological situation can be summarised as follows: 
The valley-dwelling peoples, that is the 'Burmese' and the 'Shans', mostly practise wet rice cultivation with moderate though adequate efficiency. 
This permits a system of continuous cultivation and continuous settlement even in areas where the annual rainfall is relatively slight. 
Nearly all these valley peoples make use of animals for cultivation and trans port. 
Except in the central ¡®Dry Zone¡¯ of Burma, the mean density of population is nearly everywhere so low that land resources are ample. 
Under normal conditions¡ªthat is in the absence of war and epidemics and similar disasters¡ªthe valley peoples can always easily raise more rice than is immediately required for the consumption of the actual cultivators. 
This secure economic basis permits the development of trade and small scale urbanisation and a moderate degree of general cultural sophistication. 
As a broad generalisation it may be said that the valley peoples constituent a semi-literate peasantry. 
In an economic sense they live at a considerably ¡®higher¡¯ level of organisation than their neighbours in the surrounding mountains.
In contrast, the normal shifting cultivation techniques practised by the hill peoples can only be expected to yield a surplus under exceptional conditions of low population density and specially favourable terrain. 
Wherever this technique proves inadequate, the hill peoples are forced into expedients of various kinds. 
Some groups, such as the Central Chins, have developed quite elaborate schemes of crop rotation; others, notably the Angami Nagas and certain Kachin groups, have gone in for the construction of irrigated rice terraces cut out of the mountainside; others again have found a solution to their difficulties by achieving some form of political and economic alliance with their more prosperous neighbours of the plains. 
This latter kind of symbiosis has assumed a variety of forms at different times in different places. 
For example, the mountaineers are sometimes regarded as the political over- lords of the valley, so that the valley people pay a feudal rent to the hill chieftains; sometimes the hill peoples merely exploit the fact that they control the cross-country communications between the valleys and levy a toll on passing caravans; some times the valley peoples have been willing to pay 'blackmail' provided the hillmen agreed not to raid the valley crops; sometimes the valley chieftains have engaged the hillmen as mercenaries on a large scale.
All such transactions are related to the fact that as a general rule the valley peoples are producers of rice surplus; to their own requirements, while equally, as a general rule; the hill peoples suffer from a rice deficiency which must somehow be made good from outside. 
This crucial economic fact, is of the utmost importance for the understanding of all long term social developments throughout the Burma area. 
It applies with particular force to the zone I am calling the Kachin Hills Area.
In this zone we have already seen that, at first approxima tion, the linguistic and territorial category Shan corresponds to ¡®valley dwellers and wet rice cultivators¡¯, while the vague category Kachin denotes the highlanders.
The mountain dwelling Kachins, however, do not all support themselves in the same way and we need to consider the different techniques employed and the different kinds of economy that result.
I propose to distinguish three types of hill agriculture which I shall call (a) monsoon taungya, grassland taungya, (c) irrigated hill terraces. 
The merits and limitations of these different techniques are very relevant to our discussion.
The term taungya (hill field) is a Burmese term which des cribes a technique resembling that described as jhum in the literature of Assam and as ladang in the literature of Malaya. 
It has been the subject of much learned abuse but not much careful observation. 
A geographer has recently described the procedure as follows:
In taungya cultivation the larger trees are felled and the jungle burnt over. The resultant clearing is cultivated with such crops as dry hill rice, maize, millets, buckwheat and opium poppy. 
When the original fertility and that contributed by the wood ash are ex hausted (say in one to four years) the clearing is abandoned and reverts to tangled scrub and bracken. 
As it is easier to clear fresh forest than the regrowth long abandoned taungya is rarely returned to and villages often shift bodily when the suitable land in their neighbourhood is exhausted. 
Naturally these practices are attended with serious deforestation and soil erosion.
This decidedly prejudiced account distorts the reality. 
Map 2 shows the Kachin Hills Area subdivided on a climatic basis.
Zone A is typical monsoon forest country. 
Here the temperatures and rainfall are such that abandoned forest clearings, unless grossly abused, will very rapidly become covered with a strong growth of secondary jungle. 
Throughout this area the Kachins have a clearly formulated theory of how taung- ya ought to be cultivated. 
I call this procedure monsoon taungya. 
The first requirement is that it should be cleared for one year only and then abandoned; the second that a piece of land which has been cleared once should not be cleared again for about 12 or 15 years. 
If this procedure is followed, then there is no deforestation and negligible soil loss. 
In such conditions dry hill rice can be made to produce regular yields approaching those obtained from irrigated wet rice.
Such a procedure implies that every piece of land as it goes out of cultivation is fallowed for at least 12 years. 
Each unit of population therefore requires a formidably large total area of farmland, and anything in the way of a large permanent closely packed village community will find itself many miles from some of its outlying property. 
To avoid this, Kachin com munities very frequently consist of a cluster of small villages or hamlets widely scattered over the total community property.
There is a conflict here between the interests of military security, which call for large settlements enclosed within some kind of fortification, and the interests of economic convenience which call for small fragmented settlements situated close to the land used for cultivation. 
British Administrators fre quently complained at the Kachins fondness for splitting up their settlements into smaller and smaller villages, and it is probably the case that the establishment of an enforced Pax Britannica did encourage the further fragmentation of Kachin settlement. 
Groups, which formerly would have lived together for mutual protection within a common stockade, preferred, under the British, to hive off and live on their own lands. 
However, the few records we have concerning the size of pre-British stockaded Kachin villages do not suggest that the settlement pattern then was very different from what it is now.
However, this is the point. 
Although the average density of the population over the whole region is very low, and although there would be quite enough land to go round if this population were evenly distributed, the population is not in fact evenly distributed. 
There are local concentrations of population living at relatively high density. 
These concentrations are the result of past political events, such as local wars or external administrative interference; but, whatever their origin, they have the present-day consequence that there are a great many localities, even within the potentially fertile Zone A, where taungya is practised on a rotation cycle of substaintially less than 12 years and in which crops are grown on the same land for more than one season at a time. 
In such circumstances, taungya methods do definitely lead in the long run to erosion and declining fertility. 
The Kachins them selves are well aware of this; they do not misuse their land by choice, they only reduce the fallow period of their cultivation cycle when local land scarcity makes it inevitable that they should do so.
In addition, the prosperity of certain parts of Zone A has been greatly affected in the past by the vicissitudes of the trade in special local products. 
Thus amber and salt and india- rubber were, even within recent times, of major importance for the Hukawng Valley, though they signify little at the present time. 
Similarly, the jade trade has been outstandingly erratic, while the iron and silver deposits of the Hkamti Long area, which were once of major local significance, are no longer considered worth exploiting at all. 