CHAPTER 16 The Opium War and the Great Divergence
 Whereas European forces and those of China were evenly matched through the early 1700s, there¡¯s no doubt that a Great Military Divergence opened up over the following century. 
By the time of the Opium War of 1839 to 1842, the divergence was huge, enabling the British, who were severely outnumbered and far from home, to overpower Qing forces in nearly every battle at sea and on land. 
The most systematic study of weaponry used in the war concludes that the Chinese and British were in two different historical eras: the British in the Fire Weapon Era and the Chinese in the Mixed Era, when traditional arms, or ¡°cold weapons¡±£¨Àä±øÆ÷), comprised the majority of arms, while gunpowder weapons, or ¡°hot weapons¡±£¨Ÿá±øÆ÷), were used in small numbers.
Some historians call for caution about such assessments. 
Peter Lorge, for example, has suggested that ¡°Western military technology had been absorbed into the Qing military as it became available over the course of the nineteenth century. 
Elsewhere he argues that China was never more than a decade or two behind the West.
This was certainly true through the first part of the eighteenth century, and we historians must be careful when making judgments about European superiority¡ªoften new data force us to revisit those judgments. 
But it seems clear that by the mid-1700s a military gap was opening, and by the Opium War the British had an overwhelming military edge.
What underlay this edge? 
Part of the answer of course has to do with industrialization. 
Steamships destroyed warjunks, towed long trains of traditional vessels into position, reconnoitered shallows and narrows, and, equally importantly, decreased communication times, allowing for minute, systematic coordination of the war effort.
Similarly, industrial ironworks made strong, supple metal for muskets and cannons, and steam power was used to bore cannons and mix, crumble, and sort gunpowder.
But industrialization isn¡¯t the only answer. 
Many of the innovations that most helped the British weren¡¯t about steam power or the division of labor or mechanized factories. 
They stemmed, rather, from the application of seventeenth and eighteenth-century experimental science to warfare. 
During the mid-1700s, new scientific discoveries enabled Europeans to measure the speed of projectiles, understand the effects of wind resistance, model trajectories, make better and more consistent gunpowder, develop deadly airborne missiles, and master the use of explosive shells. 
These innovations as much as the use of steamships and industrial manufacturing techniques underlay the British edge in the Opium War.
Yet there is also another reason for the Great Military Divergence of the nineteenth century. 
Even as Europeans were making rapid strides in the science of war, China¡¯s military power was atrophying because of lack of practice. 
By the outbreak of hostilities in 1839, Qing China had undergone a long period of relative peace, and its armed forces, once among the best in the world, had become weak and ineffective.
Rusty Swords: The Great East Asian Peace 
If we examine the number of battles recorded in dynastic histories per year for the period 900 to 1900 CE, we see that the period 1760-1830 has the lowest level of armed conflict in the whole series (see Graph 1.1 and Appendix 2) 
There were major military actions, of course: wars in Southeast Asia (Burma, 1766-1770, and Vietnam, 1788-1789) and campaigns against rebels within China and on its borders, most notably the Lin Shuangwen Rebellion in Taiwan (1786-1787), the White Lotus Rebellion of Central China (1795-1804), and the Eight Trigram Uprising, which actually breached the gates of the Forbidden City.
But none of these, with the possible exception of the White Lotus Rebellion and its associated Eight Trigram Uprising, were considered existential wars from the perspective of the Qing state. 
As a prominent scholar of China¡¯s military history puts it, most of these engagements were ¡°restricted to limited areas within China proper or the ... imperial periphery.¡±
Compared to the Ming dynasty at a similar stage¡ªthat is, a century and a half or so after dynastic founding¡ªthe Qing during this period faced no significant external threats. 
In contrast, the Ming experienced a difficult middle period. 
A hundred seventy-five years after founding it faced a resurgence of Central Asian power and vehement and sustained raids by the Wo (Japanese) along its coasts. 
The latter may not have been an existential threat, but the former certainly was, and one reason that Ming officials were so eager to experiment with new weaponry in the 1500s and 1600s was that they feared that their capital might fall to an invasion from people beyond the Great Wall, as indeed it eventually did. 
By a comparable period of the Qing, however¡ªthe mid-1700s¡ªthe Qing had few such worries. 
They had established an unprecedented hegemony in Central Asia, decisively ending the threat from horse-born nomads.
China specialists Peter Perdue and Frederic Wakeman have both suggested, in separate publications, that the Qing were, in a way, victims of their own success.
The period of Qing conquest, consolidation, and expansion had been exceedingly violent, with devastating wars that wracked East and Central Asia and corresponded with a significant decrease in China¡¯s population. 
But once the Qing had established its dominance, expanding China¡¯s borders to their largest extent in history, it remained virtually unchallenged until the mid-nineteenth century. 
In those generations of relative peace, 1760 to 1839, military leaders in China had little need to focus on innovation or incorporate new methods and technologies from beyond East Asia. 
Korea and Japan were also generally at peace during this period. 
East Asians had access to the new technologies and techniques of war that were being forged on the other side of Eurasia, but they had few incentives to adopt or incorporate them on a significant scale.
The resulting military gap became clear to observers before the Opium War. 
In 1836, an anonymous British correspondent prepared a report about China¡¯s military strength and concluded that if the art of war was the most ¡°infallible criterion of the civilization and advancement of societies,¡± then China was in the lowest state of civilization.?Its gunpowder was coarse, uneven, and liable to spoil. 
Its cannons were old-fashioned, with uneven bores and primitive carriages, ¡°mere blocks of wood, or solid beds on which the gun is lashed down with rattans, so that it must be impossible to fire any but point blank shots, and very difficult to direct the gun to an object, except that immediately in front of the embrasure whence fired.¡±
For firearms it had only ¡°ill-made¡± matchlock muskets and no flintlocks, pistols, or any of the other ¡°tribes of fire-arm.¡± 
In fact, he observed, China¡¯s soldiers still relied heavily on the bow and arrow, which, given how poor the rest of their weapons were, was ¡°the most efficient of their arms.¡±
Chinese defenses were, the reporter noted, mere ¡°samples of fortification in its infant state; without fosses, bastions, glacis, or counter defences of any kind; being, in fact, but such lines as the engineers of a disciplined army would throw up, as temporary defences and to cover their guns, in the course of a single night.¡±
Chinese naval vessels were so laughable that they were ¡°beyond the power of description or ridicule to portray.¡±
Indeed, the correspondent wrote, he wouldn¡¯t be surprised if a couple of New Zealand war canoes wouldn¡¯t outmatch the entire Chinese navy.
(Charles Dickens would later describe a Chinese junk, which he saw at the Crystal Palace in 1848, as a ¡°ridiculous abortion.¡±)
But it wasn¡¯t just technology and engineering that the Chinese lacked. 
The reporter discerned a marked deficiency in military readiness. 
When garrison troops in Guangzhou mustered for duty, he wrote, they come in, one by one, undressed, unarmed, unprepared, and half asleep; while piles of brown felt caps, and heaps of shabby looking red and yellow long jackets, bearing the character ¡°courage¡± ... are brought through the gates, for the adornment of the heroes of the hour; by and bye, straggles in an officer, generally the largest sized man that can be found; some bows, sheaves of arrows, and rusty swords, make up the warlike show; evidently got up for the nonce to astonish and awe ¡°the barbarians,¡± who might, did they please, be in the governor¡¯s harem before the guard could awake from their slumbers.
On occasion European travelers had observed that Chinese swords were so rusty that the soldiers could scarcely draw them.
At the end of his report, the correspondent expressed surprise himself at the extent of China¡¯s military backwardness. ¡°We have now gone through the subject which we sat down to discuss, and although we were well aware that the military force of the Chinese empire was much overrated, we rise astonished at the weakness, the utter imbecility.... 
It seems indeed strange that the whole fabric does not fall asunder of itself.
Of this we are convinced; that, at the first vigorous and well directed blow from a foreign power, it will totter to its base.¡±
He was wrong about how much the Qing would totter, but modern research corroborates his views about Qing military capacity. 
Historians Liu Hongliang and Zhang Jianxiong have conducted an exhaustive and detailed comparison of Chinese and European guns circa 1840 and conclude, ¡°At the time of the Opium War, the difference between British and Chinese cannon technology and capacity is an objective fact.... 
The British military had made innovations and improvements in all aspects¡ªdesign, ammunition, powder technology, firing mechanisms, and especially in the quality of the iron,the production, the finishing and other such key technologies¡ªsuch that their cannons¡¯ range, speed of firing, accuracy, and lethality were superior to Qing cannons.¡±
The Qing had not made such improvements. 
As Liu Hongliang notes in a different work, ¡°At the time of the Opium War, the Qing military¡¯s front-loading cannon form was the same type as that of seventeenth century Europe, and ... the design hadn¡¯t seen any kind of change.¡± 
Qing cannons were heavier, clumsier, slower to load and fire, and far less efficient in terms of powder use. 
Indeed, many of the cannons deployed in coastal forts were actually forged or cast in the seventeenth or early eighteenth century. 
To be sure there were local exceptions. 
Artisans in coastal regions--particularly in Guangdong Province--could produce more up-to-date ordnance based on Western models, but they were still not as effective as the advanced guns of Britain, and in any case they were outliers.
Modern research also shows that Qing infantry forces were also backward. 
Liu and Zhang note that troops ¡°were equipped with sixty or seventy percent traditional weapons, of which the most important were the long lance, the side sword, the bow and arrow, and the rattan shield, and only thirty or forty percent [of their armament consisted of] gunpowder weapons, of which the most important were the matchlock musket, the heavy musket, the cannon, the fire arrow, and the earth-shaking bomb and such things.¡±
The Qing matchlock musket was constructed according to a design that hadn¡¯t changed much since the seventeenth century.
(It¡¯s interesting to note that Qing armies weren¡¯t the only non-European forces clinging to matchlocks. They were still in use in the Levant and Iran, for example.)
European armies had long since switched to flintlocks, and the British were undergoing a transition to percussion cap muskets, which required no externally applied sparks at all. 
In contrast, the Qing matchlock guns were slow, unwieldy, and dangerous, as British observers noted with empathy and derision. 
¡°Every soldier,¡± wrote naval officer William Hutcheon Hall, ¡°has to carry a match or port fire to ignite the powder in the matchlock when loaded. 
Hence, when a poor fellow is wounded and falls, the powder, which is very apt to run out of his pouch over his clothes, is very likely to be ignited by his own match, and in this way he may either be blown up at once, or else his clothes may be ignited; ... it is therefore not surprising that they should regard the matchlock with some little apprehension."