Census, Map, Museum
In the original edition of Imagined Communities I wrote that ¡®so often in the ¡°nation-building¡± policies of the new states one sees both a genuine, popular nationalist enthusiasm, and a systematic, even Machiavellian, instilling of nationalist ideology through the mass media, the educational system, administrative regulations, and so forth¡¯. 
My shortsighted assumption then was that official nationalism in the colonized worlds of Asia and Africa was modelled directly on that of the dynastic states of nineteenth-century Europe. 
Subsequent reflection has persuaded me that this view was hasty and superficial, and that the immediate genealogy should be traced to the imaginings of the colonial state. 
At first sight, this conclusion may seem surprising, since colonial states were typically tfnft¡¯-nationalist, and often violently so. 
But if one looks beneath colonial ideologies and policies to the grammar in which, from the mid nineteenth century, they were deployed, the lineage becomes decidedly more clear.
Few things bring this grammar into more visible relief than three institutions of power which, although invented before the mid nineteenth century, changed their form and function as the colonized zones entered the age of mechanical reproduction. 
These three institutions were the census, the map, and the museum: together, they profoundly shaped the way in which the colonial state imagined its dominion - the nature of the human beings it ruled, the geography of its domain, and the legitimacy of its ancestry. 
To explore the character of this nexus I shall, in this chapter, confine my attention to Southeast Asia, since my conclusions are tentative, and my claims to serious specialization limited to that region. 
Southeast Asia does, however, offer those with comparative historical interests special advantages, since it includes territories colonized by almost all the ¡®white¡¯ imperial powers -- Britain, France, Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands, and the United States -- as well as uncolonized Siam. 
Readers with greater knowledge of other parts of Asia and Africa than mine will be better positioned to judge if my argument is sustainable on a wider historical and geographical stage.
THE CENSUS
In two valuable recent papers the sociologist Charles Hirschman has begun the study of the mentalites of the British colonial census-makers for the Straits Settlements and peninsular Malaya, and their successors working for the independent conglomerate state of Malaysia. 
Hirschman¡¯s facsimiles of the ¡®identity categories¡¯ of successive censuses from the ¡®late nineteenth century up to the recent present show an extraordinarily rapid, superficially arbitrary, series of changes, in which categories are continuously agglomerated, disaggregated, recombined, intermixed, and reordered (but the politically powerful identity categories always lead the list). 
From these censuses he draws two principal conclusions. 
The first is that, as the colonial period wore on, the census categories became more visibly and exclusively racial. 
Religious identity, on the other hand, gradually disappeared as a primary census classification. 
¡®Hindoos¡¯ - ranked alongside ¡®Klings¡¯, and ¡®Bengalees¡¯ - vanished after the first census of 1871. 
¡®Parsees¡¯ lasted until the census of 1901, where they still appeared ¡ª packed in with ¡®Bengalis¡¯, ¡®Burmese¡¯, and ¡®Tamils¡¯¡ª under the broad category ¡®Tamils and Other Natives of India¡¯. 
His second conclusion is that, on the whole, the large racial categories were retained and even concentrated after independence, but now redesignated and reranked as ¡®Malaysian¡¯, ¡®Chinese¡¯, ¡®Indian¡¯, and ¡®Other¡¯. 
Yet anomalies continued up into the 1980s. 
In the 1980 census ¡®Sikh¡¯ still appeared nervously as a pseudoethnic subcategory ¡ª alongside ¡®Malayali¡¯ and ¡®Telegu¡¯, ¡®Pakistani¡¯ and ¡®Bangladeshi¡¯, ¡®Sri Lankan Tamil¡¯, and ¡®Other Sri Lankan¡¯, - under the general heading ¡®Indian¡¯.
But Hirschman¡¯s wonderful facsimiles encourage one to go beyond his immediate analytical concerns. 
Take, for example, the 1911 Federated Malay States Census, which lists under ¡®Malay Population by Race¡¯ the following: ¡®Malay¡¯, ¡®Javanese¡¯, ¡®Sakai¡¯, ¡®Banjarese¡¯, ¡®Boyanese¡¯, ¡®Mendeling¡¯ (sic), ¡®Krinchi¡¯ (sic), ¡®Jambi¡¯, ¡®Achinese¡¯, ¡®Bugis¡¯, and ¡®Other¡¯. 
Of these ¡®groups¡¯ all but (most) ¡®Malay¡¯ and ¡®Sakai¡¯ originated from the islands of Sumatra, Java, Southern Borneo, and the Celebes, all parts of the huge neighbouring colony of the Netherlands East Indies. 
But these extra-FMS origins receive no recognition from the census-makers who, in constructing their ¡®Malays¡¯, keep their eyes modestly lowered to their own colonial borders. 
(Needless to say, across the waters, Dutch census-makers were constructing a different imagining of ¡®Malays¡¯, as a minor ethnicity alongside, not above, ¡®Achinese¡¯, ¡®Javanese¡¯, and the like.) 
¡®Jambi¡¯ and ¡®Krinchi¡¯ refer to places, rather than to anything remotely identifiable as ethnolinguistic. 
It is extremely unlikely that, in 1911, more than a tiny fraction of those categorized and subcategorized would have recognized themselves under such labels. 
These ¡®identities¡¯, imagined by the (confusedly) classifying mind of the colonial state, still awaited a reification which imperial administrative penetration would soon make possible. 
One notices, in addition, the census-makers¡¯ passion for completeness and unambiguity. 
Hence their intolerance of multiple, politically ¡®transvestite¡¯, blurred, or changing identifications. 
Hence the weird subcategory, under each racial group, of Others¡¯ -- who, nonetheless, are absolutely not to be confused with other ¡®Others¡¯. 
The fiction of the census -- is that everyone is in it, and that everyone has one -- and only one -- extremely clear place. 
No fractions.
This mode of imagining by the colonial state had origins much older than the censuses of the 1870s, so that, in order fully to understand why the late-nineteenth-century censuses are yet profoundly novel, it is useful to look back to the earliest days of European penetration of Southeast Asia. 
Two examples, drawn from the Philippine and Indonesian archipelagoes, are instructive. 
In an important recent book, William Henry Scott has attempted meticulously to reconstruct the class structure of the pre-Hispanic Philippines, on the basis of the earliest Spanish records. 
As a professional historian Scott is perfectly aware that the Philippines owes its name to Felipe II of ¡®Spain¡¯, and that, but for mischance or luck, the archipelago might have fallen into Dutch or English hands, become politically segmented, or been recombined with further conquests. 
It is tempting therefore to attribute his curious choice of topic to his long residence in the Philippines and his strong sympathy with a Filipino nationalism that has been, for a century now, on the trail of an aboriginal Eden. 
But the chances are good that the deeper basis for the shaping of his imagination was the sources on which he was compelled to rely. 
For the fact is that wherever in the islands the earliest clerics and conquistadors ventured they espied, on shore, principales, hidalgos, pecheros,and esclavos (princes, noblemen, commoners and slaves) -- quasi-estates adapted from the social classifications of late mediaeval Iberia. 
The documents they left behind offer plenty of incidental evidence that the hidalgos¡¯ were mostly unaware of one another¡¯s existence in the huge, scattered, and sparsely populated archipelago, and, where aware, usually saw one another not ashidalgos, but as enemies or potential slaves. 
But the power of the grid is so great that such evidence is marginalized in Scott¡¯s imagination, and therefore it is hard for him to see that the ¡®class structure¡¯ of the precolonial period is a ¡®census¡¯ imagining created from the poops of Spanish galleons. 
Wherever they went, hidalgos and esclavos loomed up, who could only be aggregated as such, that is ¡®structurally¡¯, by an incipient colonial state.
For Indonesia we have, thanks to the research of Mason Hoadley, a detailed account of an important judicial case decided in the coastal port of Cirebon, Java, at the end of the seventeenth century. 
By luck, the Dutch (VOC) and local Cirebonese records are still available. 
If the Cirebonese account only had survived, we would know the accused murderer as a high official of the Cirebonese court, and only by his title Ki Aria Marta Ningrat, not a personal name. 
The VOC records, however, angrily identify him as aChinees¡ª indeed that is the single most important piece of information about him that they convey. 
It is clear then that the Cirebonese court classified people by rank and status, while the Company did so by something like ¡®race¡¯. 
There is no reason whatever to think that the accused murderer -- whose high status attests to his and his ancestors' long integration into Cirebonese society, no matter what their origins -thought of himself as ¡®a¡¯Chinees.
How then did the VOC arrive at this classification? 
From what poops was it possible to imagine Chinees?
Surely only those ferociously mercantile poops which, under centralized command, roved ceaselessly from port to port between the Gulf of Mergui and the mouth of the Yangtze-kiang. 
Oblivious of the heterogeneous populations of the Middle Kingdom; of the mutual incomprehensibility of many of their spoken languages; and of the peculiar social and geographic origins of their diaspora across coastal Southeast Asia, the Company imagined, with its trans-oceanic eye, an endless series ofChinezen,as the conquistadors had seen an endless series of hidalgos.
And on the basis of this inventive census it began to insist that those under its control whom it categorized asChinezendress, reside, marry, be buried, and bequeath property according to that census. 
It is striking that the much less far-faring and commercially minded Iberians in the Philippines imagined a quite different census category: what they called sangley. 
Sangley was an incorporation into Spanish of the Hokkien sengli¡ª meaning ¡®trader¡¯.
One can imagine Spanish proto-census men asking the traders drawn to Manila by the galleon trade: ¡®Who are you¡¯, and being sensibly told ¡®We are traders¡¯.
Not sailing the seven Asian seas, for two centuries the Iberians remained in a comfortably provincial conceptual fog. 
Only very slowly did the sangley turn into ¡®Chinese¡¯ -- until the word disappeared in the early nineteenth century to make way for a VOC-style chino.
The real innovation of the census-takers of the 1870s was, therefore, not in the construction of ethnic-racial classifications, but rather in their systematic quantification.
Precolonial rulers in the Malayo-Javanese world had attempted enumerations of the populations under their control, but these took the form of tax-rolls and levy-lists. 
Their purposes were concrete and specific: to keep track of those on whom taxes and military conscription could effectively be imposed -- for these rulers were interested solely in economic surplus and armable manpower. 
Early European regimes in the region did not, in this respect, differ markedly from their predecessors. 
But after 1850 colonial authorities were using increasingly sophisticated administrative means to enumerate populations, including the women and children (whom the ancient rulers had always ignored), according to a maze of grids which had no immediate financial or military purpose. 
In the old days, those subjects liable for taxes and conscription were usually well aware of their numerability; ruler and ruled understood each other very well, if antagonistically, on the matter. 
But by 1870, a non-taxpaying, unlevyable ¡®Cochin-Chinese¡¯ woman could live out her life, happily or unhappily, in the Straits Settlements, without the slightest awareness that this was how she was being mapped from on high. 
Here the peculiarity of the new census becomes apparent. 
It tried carefully to count the objects of its feverish imagining. 
Given the exclusive nature of the classificatory system, and the logic of quantification itself, a ¡®Cochin-Chinese¡¯ had to be understood as one digit in an aggregable series of replicable ¡®Cochin-Chinese¡¯ -- within, of course, the state¡¯s domain. 
The new demographic topography put down deep social and institutional roots as the colonial state multiplied its size and functions. 
Guided by its imagined map it organized the new educational, juridical, public-health, police, and immigration bureaucracies it was building on the principle of ethno-racial hierarchies which were, however, always understood in terms of parallel series. 
The flow of subject populations through the mesh of differential schools, courts, clinics, police stations and immigration offices created ¡®traffic-habits¡¯ which in time gave real social life to the state¡¯s earlier fantasies. 
Needless to say, it was not always plain sailing, and the state frequently bumped into discomforting realities. Far and away the most important of these was religious affiliation, which served as the basis of very old, very stable imagined communities not in the least aligned with the secular state's authoritarian grid-map. 