The Creation of Character 
¡°What is character but the determination of incident? 
And what is incident but the illumination of character?¡±
¡ªThe Art of Fiction Henry James 
What is Character?
That¡¯s a question that has haunted literary theorists from the beginning of the written word. 
The challenge of creating real people in real situations is so varied, so multifaceted, so unique, so individually challenging, that trying to define how you do it is like trying to hold a bundle of water in your hands. 
Generation after generation of noted writers, from Aristotle to Aeschylus, from Ibsen to Ionesco, from Eugene O'Neill to Arthur Miller, have struggled to capture the art and the craft of creating good characters.
One of the most articulate literary theorists of the nineteenth century was the great American novelist Henry James, author of Portrait of a Lady, Wings of the Dove, Turn of the Screw, and Daisy Miller, among other master works. 
James was fascinated with the art of fiction writing, and approached it like a scientist, the same way his brother, William James, the famous psychologist, studied the dynamics of the human mind. 
Henry James wrote several essays trying to document and define the intricacies of creating character. 
In one of those essays, The Art of Fiction, James poses a literary question: What is character but the determination of incident? 
And what is incident hut the illumination of character?
It¡¯s a profound statement.
The key word, of course, is incident. 
According to the dictionary, an incident is ¡°a specific occurrence or event that occurs in connection or relationship to something else.¡± 
Screenplays are usually about a key incident, and the story is the character acting and reacting to it. 
It is the major source of all action and all character. 
After twenty-five years of reading and analyzing screenplays and movies, I have only recently begun to understand the importance of the incident. 
All good movies, it seems, focus on the unfolding of a specific incident or event; and it is this incident that becomes the engine that powers the story to its completion.
Frodo¡¯s assuming the mantle of ring bearer in Lord of the Rings is the key incident in that film; as is Lester Burnham¡¯s seeing the young girl Angela in American Beauty; as is Jake Gittes¡¯s being confronted by the real Mrs. Mulwray in Chinatown. 
Sometimes incidents and events in our lives bring out the best in us, or the worst. 
Sometimes we recover from these events and sometimes we don¡¯t--but they always impact us. 
At other times how we act and react, or deal with a particular situation, reveals our ¡°true¡± nature and tells us who we really are. 
Miles in Sideways is a good illustration of that. 
When he is saving his special bottle of wine for a ¡°special occasion,¡± he sees he doesn't have a special time or place for opening it. 
So he sits alone, in a fast-food joint, hiding his bottle of wine.
Events in a screenplay are specifically designed to bring out the truth about the characters so that we, the reader and audience, can transcend our ordinary lives and achieve a connection, or bond, between ¡°them and us.¡± 
We see ourselves in them and enjoy a moment, perhaps, of recognition and understanding.
In The Art of Fiction, Henry James says that the incidents you create for your characters are the best ways to illuminate who they are--that is, reveal their true nature, their essential character. 
How they respond to a particular incident or event, how they act and react, what they say and do is what really defines the essence of their character.
How can we relate this concept to the process of creating character?
Thelma &amp; Louise (Callie Khouri) is a story about two women who kill a man, then attempt to flee the law and escape to Mexico, but get caught at the Grand Canyon and, rather than go to prison, choose to take their own lives. 
If you take a look at these two characters, they are two distinct, individual people who have the same dramatic need: to escape safely to Mexico. 
They are different aspects of each other, and they share everything, their life as well as their death. 
And during the course of their journey, we get to know them, love them, and wish that things might have been different.
The reason why Henry James¡¯s statement is so relevant is because the elements within the character really determine the incident; how the character reacts to that incident is what illuminates and truly defines his/her character. 
In Thelma &amp; Louise, it¡¯s set up immediately, at the beginning of Act I. 
Thelma (Geena Davis) and Louise (Susan Sarandon) set out for a weekend holiday in the mountains, stop at a bar, and meet a guy named Harlan, who takes a liking to Thelma. 
He plies her with drinks, then attempts to rape her in the parking lot. 
It turns ugly, until Louise comes along, threatens Harlan with Thelma¡¯s gun, and, when he mouths off to her, loses it, pulls the trigger, and kills him. 
Plot Point I. It is the key incident in the movie. 
Now the ¡°real¡± story is about their attempt to escape to Mexico.
As mentioned, Plot Point I is the true beginning of the screenplay and swings the story around into Act II. 
For the rest of the story, Thelma and Louise are on the run. 
As they race down the highway of their life, like so many other characters in so many other movies, they are forced to come to grips with themselves, find out who they really are, and ultimately take responsibility for their lives and actions. 
Thelma &amp; Louise is a road movie, yes, but it's really a journey of enlightenment, a journey of self-discovery. 
And it begins with the incident, the hub of the wheel of action.
It is the character that determines the incident, in this case Louise¡¯s killing Harlan, then fleeing in fear and uncertainty. 
What¡¯s important for me, and you, as writers, is to ask what it was within Louise¡¯s character that caused her to pull the trigger--because this incident is what ultimately reveals and illuminates the character. 
In Louise¡¯s case, it is an incident that happened to her when she was a young woman; it¡¯s only mentioned briefly, but it¡¯s implied that she was raped in Texas and then brought charges against her attackers, but could get no satisfaction, no revenge, no justice. 
Indeed, instead of being seen as the victim, she was considered by many to have been the instigator. 
At that moment, she made a promise to herself: She would never take one step inside the state of Texas ever again. 
This decision ultimately brings about her death.
Joseph Campbell reflects in The Power of Myth that in mythic terms, the first part of any journey of initiation must deal with the death of the old self and the resurrection of the new. 
Campbell says that the hero, or heroic figure, ¡°moves not into outer space but into inward space, to the place from which all being comes, into the consciousness that is the source of all things, the kingdom of heaven within. 
The images are outward, but their reflection is inward.¡±
It seems to me that the Louise in Act I who pulled the trigger, killing Harlan, is not the Louise who really killed him; rather, it was the young Louise, caught in the web of female justice, Texas style, who actually pulled that trigger. 
She never recovered from her experience, and it simmered in her consciousness below the thin veneer of time and memory, just waiting for a chance to erupt.
Writers create characters in a variety of different ways. 
I once asked Waldo Salt how he went about creating characters, and he replied that the first thing he did was to choose a simple dramatic need; then he would add to it, coloring it until it became a universal chord common to Everyman. 
For Waldo, that became the essence of his character. 
And he was a master screenwriter, a major artist.
What¡¯s the best way to go about creating character? 
And how do you establish a relationship between your character, his or her dramatic choices, and the story you¡¯re telling? 
How do you determine whether your character will drive a car, or ride a bicycle, or take the bus or subway, and what kind of paintings or posters hang in his/her house or apartment?
Character is the essential internal foundation of your screenplay. The cornerstone. 
It is the heart and soul and nervous system of your screenplay. 
Before you can put one word down on paper, you must know your character.
In a screenplay, the story always moves forward, from beginning to end, whether in a linear or nonlinear fashion. It doesn¡¯t matter if it¡¯s a story like Titanic or The Hours; Lord of the Rings or The English Patient (Anthony Minghella); The Shawshank Redemption or Memento (Christopher Nolan). 
The way you drive your story forward is by focusing on the actions of the character and the dramatic choices he or she makes during the narrative story line.
So what is character? 
Action is character; a person is what he does, not what he says. 
Film is behavior. 
Because we¡¯re telling a story pictures, we must show how the character acts and reacts to the Kidents and events that he/she confronts and overcomes (or doesn¡¯t overcome) during the story line. 
If you¡¯re writing your script and sense your characters are not as sharp or defined as you think they should be, and feel they should be stronger, more dimensional, and more universal in terms of thoughts, feelings, and emotions, the first thing you must determine is whether they're an active force in the screenplay--whether they cause things to happen, or whether things happen to them.
But first, who is your main character? 
Who is your story about? 
If your story is about three guys preparing to steal moon rocks, which one of the three is the main character?
You have to know that. 
In Lord of the Rings, do you know who the main character is? 
Is it Frodo, Sam, Gandalf (Ian McKellen), or Aragom (Viggo Mortensen)? 
Or is it all of them? 
If you aren¡¯t sure, just ask yourself: Who is this story about? 
In Lord of the Rings, you could say, with good cause, that Aragom is the main character because he leads the Fellowship, makes the decisions, and becomes the king. 
But take away all the trappings and the story is really about returning the ring to its place of origin, Mount Doom, so it can be destroyed. 
That¡¯s what this story is about; therefore, Frodo is the main character. 
You can have more than one main character, of course, but it certainly clarifies things if you identify a single hero or heroine. 
Frequently a story is about what distinguishes the main character from the other characters. 
Who is the main character in The Shawshank Redemption. 
Red, the Morgan Freeman character, has the largest part of the movie, and he is the character telling us about Andy Dufrense (Tim Robbins). 
But the story is really about Andy, so even though his part is not as large as Red¡¯s, he is the main character because the story is about him. 
What about Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid. 
Butch (Paul Newman) is the main character. He is the man making the decisions. 
Butch has a great line where he broaches one of his usual wild schemes to Sundance (Robert Redford), and Sundance just looks at him, doesn¡¯t say a word, and turns away. 
And Butch mutters to himself: ¡°I got vision and the rest of the world wears bifocals.¡± 
And it¡¯s true. 
Within the context of that screenplay, Butch Cassidy is the main character--he is the character who plans things, who acts. Butch leads and Sundance follows.