SIX The Renaissance 
During the two hundred years that may, somewhat arbitrarily, be marked off as the Renaissance--say, from the birth of Nicholas of Cusa (1401) to the death of Giordano Bruno (I600)--there was no great philosopher to turn his mind to the problems of aesthetics, and no single thinker made systematic contributions to its progress. 
This may (or may not) be surprising, in view of the tremendous flowering of creative energy in the plastic arts, in poetry, and in music, the results of which were not only to enrich the Western world so greatly, but also, in good time, to give rise to deeper and broader reflection on the nature and importance of art.
The mature systems of scholastic philosophy--those of Thomas, Scotus and Occam--had reached a stage of consolidation, rather than enterprise, and there was a gradual hardening of arteries in the academically dominant Aris-totelianism. 
The new and hopeful philosophy during this period was a revived Platonism, or Neoplatonism, learned and taught with poetic enthusiasm, and developed in novel speculative and practical directions. 
What the Renaissance Platonists discussed and believed was often highly fanciful, especially where they were most original. 
But some of their leading ideas did much to enhance the freedom and joy of Renaissance culture, and their general philosophy had-- as in its classical form--important affinities with aesthetics. 
To get some notion of the sort of question they were preoccupied with, and to make an estimate of their contribution to the progress of aesthetic philosophy, let us consider two philosophers who may, in a broad sense, be placed in this tradition. 
Of these, Marsilio Ficino was the greatest of the self-styled followers of Plato, but the spirit and concepts of Neoplatonism also permeate the philosophy of Giordano Bruno.
NEOPLATONISM
The moving spirit of Renaissance Neoplatonism was undoubtedly Marsilio Ficino (1433-99), first translator of Plotinus into Latin and of the complete works of Plato, and founder of the new Academy in 1462, when Cosimo de¡¯ Medici set him up in a villa with some Greek manuscripts to interpret and teach the Platonic philosophy. 
In his Commentary on Plato¡¯s Symposium (originally DeAmore; written 1474-75, published 1484), and in some of the later books of his principal work, the Theologia Platonica (1482), Ficino discusses metaphysical problems that bear upon aesthetics. 
For the most part, his philosophy is a compound of ideas taken enthusiastically from Plato, Plotinus, Aristotle, St. Augustine, the pseudo-Areopagite, and others, but espoused with a new fervor and sometimes connected in novel ways. 
This philosophy was to become widely known, and widely held, in the sixteenth century.
Early in his Commentary, Ficino describes the divinely created world:¡°This composite of all the Forms and Ideas we call in Latin a mundus, and in Greek, a cosmos, that is, Orderliness. 
The attractiveness of this Orderliness is Beauty¡± (I, iii; trans. Jayne, p. 128). 
Love is then defined as ¡°the desire for Beauty¡± (p. 130)--it consists in being drawn to the Good under the aspect of beauty. 
Now, the charm that is beauty is found in the harmony of elements: in the harmony of the virtues in the soul, of colors and lines in visible things, of tones in music. 
¡°That of the soul is perceived by the mind; that of the body, by the eyes; and that of sound, by the ear alone¡± (pp. 131-32; cf. p. 166).
Ficino argues (V, iii-vi) that beauty must be incorporeal--in the same way, he holds, that light is incorporeal (pp. 170-71)--since it is a property of virtues, as well as of sights and sounds. 
He rejects, with Plotinian arguments, attempts to analyze beauty in physical terms. 
It is not, for example, ¡°a disposition of parts, or... size and proportion together with a certain agreeableness of colors¡± (V, iii; p. 168), because then only composite things (not, say, gold) could be beautiful. 
Yet on the other hand, it is true that until a complex bodily thing has been prepared by ¡°Arrangement, Proportion, and Adornment¡± (p. 173), it is not ready to receive beauty. 
Consider a human being, for example: What, then, is the beauty of the body?
 Activity, vivacity, and a certain grace shining in the body because of the infusion of its own idea. 
This kind of glow does not descend into matter until the matter has been carefully prepared [V, vi; p. 173].
The ¡°infusion of its own idea¡± is this: when we walk along the street and encounter a person who at once attracts us, it is because ¡°the appearance and shape of a well-proportioned man agrees most clearly with that concept of mankind which our soul catches and retains from the author of everything¡± (V, v; p. 171). 
There is in the mind a Platonic Form of the ¡°true Idea of man¡± (p. 172), which is matched with the actuality and thus discerned in it.
Ficino does not explain how all the various kinds of beauty can be accounted for in this way; but it seems clear that he finds a transcendental element in all beauty. 
And it is through this element, as his Commentary goes on to tell in profuse detail, that beauty can lure love to its highest aspirations, and make a path to the contemplation of the divine.
Though the love of beauty has, in Ficino, a more markedly dynamic character than in some of his predecessors, he also sketches a theory of contemplation, based on Plato¡¯s Phaedo, that is important to his religious epistemology as well as his aesthetics. 
Contemplation consists in the withdrawal, or disassociation, in some degree, of the soul from the body, and from concern with corporeal things. 
In the resulting inward experience, the Forms are attended to in a purely rational consciousness, in which the knower, surrounded by eternal order, becomes calm and serene. 
Now, Ficino finds his experience in all creative activity, because a certain inward concentration, an attention to what does not yet exist, except as an ideal or future thing, is required in every art (¡°art¡± being taken here in the wide medieval sense of ¡°craft¡±). 
Such a concentration involves a certain freeing of the soul from the body. 
Man, being more capable of contemplation than the animals, becomes master of nature because he can exercise a variety of arts, mechanical and political, whereas spiders that spin webs, and birds that build nests, have only a single art.
Similar themes, variations on the Symposium and the Enneads, run through De gl¡¯ Eroici Furori (translated as The Heroic Enthusiasts) of Giordano Bruno (1548-1600)--it dimly reflects the contrast between sensuous beauty and the pure absolute beauty; the danger that those who are addicted to the former will be kept away from the latter; the assurance that those who approach the lower beauty in the right spirit can use it as the stepping-stone to love of the higher (see, for example, I, ii, 11; I, iii, 12,15; I, v, 29; II, i, 41). 
In this strange and rather enigmatic book,which Bruno dedicated to Sir Philip Sidney (whose acquaintance he had made in England), the discussion is carried on in a dialogue that takes the form of a commentary on successive passages of a long poem. 
There is hardly any philosophical analysis or argument, but there is a frequently eloquent development of a Neoplatonic religion of art. 
Beauty is characterized in fairly familiar terms: Thus that which causes the attraction of love to the body is a certain spirituality which we see in it, and which is called beauty, and which does not consist in major or minor dimensions, nor in determined colors or forms, but in harmony and consonance of members and colors [I, iii, 13; trans. Williams].
It is this that appears to the senses, but also and more importantly is given to the mind,
Because it sees that all which it possesses is only a limited thing, and therefore cannot be sufficient of itself, nor good of itself, nor beautiful of itself; because it is not the universal nor the absolute entity, but contracted into being this nature, this species, this form, represented to the intellect and present to the soul. 
Then from the beautiful that is understood, and consequently limited, and therefore beautiful through participation, it progresses towards that which is really beautiful, which has no margin, nor any boundaries [I, iv, 20].
Bruno¡¯s book is a kind of celebration of the poet and the artist, going farther than pre-Renaissance Platonists could ever have gone in the direction of making beauty a way of life, a religion. 
In this it reflects an important development of the Renaissance, when the artist was coming into new relationships with others. 
The artist is judged a superior man, with a unique genius that goes beyond rules, a hero who needs freedom and scope, who stamps his individual personality on his work, so that it is interesting and valuable partly (or even largely) because it is his work.
THEORY OF PAINTING
The highflying speculation and highpitched emotion of the Neoplatonists show us one side of Renaissance aesthetic thought; but for the other side we must turn from the philosophers to the theoretical practitioners (or empirically equipped theorists) of the arts themselves. 
For not only were great works created in profusion, but a great deal of thinking was going on about the principles involved--about the criteria of artistic worth and about the right methods for attaining it.
These thinkers were not philosophical aestheticians, but they were dealing in part with aesthetic problems, and more importantly they were striking out in directions that would lead to fundamental changes in the prevailing Western assumptions about, and attitudes toward, the arts. 
Taking first the visual arts, we can obtain a fairly adequate notion of what was new and important if we consider the thought of three art theorists of this period, Leon Battista Alberti, Leonardo da Vinci, and Albrecht Durer.
Setting to one side the architectural achievements of Alberti (1409-72), his place in the history of art theory rests on three works, two of which were of the greatest historical importance: On Painting (Della pittura, in three books; Latin 1435, Italian 1436); On Sculpture (Della statua, in one book; written in 1435); and. On Architecture (De re aedificatoria, in ten books; presented to Pope Nicholas V, in an early version, 1452, first published 1485). 
What is perhaps most impressive (and what was fresh) about these works is their remarkable combination (so anticipatory of the spirit of Galileo) of careful empirical inquiry with systematic interest in theory.
The empiricism is pervasive. 
To compensate for his lack of genius, Alberti says in the Architecture, ¡°I was continually searching, considering, measuring and making Draughts of every Thing I could hear of¡± (VI, I; trans. Leoni, p. 112; cf. his commendation of the Greeks, VI, iii). 
The canon of proportions for the human figure worked out in the Sculpture was derived from the measurement of many actual individuals. 
And there is his straightforward approach to painting, in terms of what the eye actually sees. 
At the very beginning of Book I Alberti begs to be considered, not as a mathematician (since ¡°Mathematicians measure with their minds alone the forms of things separated from all matter¡±) but as a painter using ¡°a more sensate wisdom.¡± 
Thus: I call a figure here anything located on a plane so the eye can see it. 
No one would deny that the painter has nothing to do with things that are not visible.
The painter is concerned solely with representing what can be seen [On Painting; trans. Spencer, p. 43].
And Alberti keeps his eye on the object throughout. 
When he says, later on, that the painter must know about bones and muscles, he remarks, ¡°Here someone will object that I have said above that the painter has only to do with things which are visible. 
He has a good memory.¡± 
But there is no contradiction, for the existence of the bone beneath the flesh is visible, even though the bone is not: ¡°So in painting the nude we place first his bones and muscles which we then cover with flesh so that it is not difficult to understand where each muscle is beneath¡± (p. 73).