Chapter 3 Form & Space 
¡°We put thirty spokes together and call it a wheel; but it is on the space where there is nothing that the utility of the wheel depends.
We turn clay to make a vessel; but it is on the space where there is nothing that the utility of the vessel depends.
We pierce doors and windows to make a house; and it is on these spaces where there is nothing that the utility of the house depends.
Therefore, just as we take advantage of what is, we should recognize the utility of what is not.¡±
Lao-tzu
Tao Te Ching
6th century B.C.
Space constantly encompasses our being. 
Through the volume of space, we move, see forms, hear sounds, feel breezes, smell the fragrances of a flower garden in bloom. 
It is a material substance like wood or stone. 
Yet it is an inherently formless vapor. Its visual form, its dimensions and scale, the quality of its light¡ªall of these qualities depend on our perception of the spatial boundaries defined by elements of form. 
As space begins to be captured, enclosed, molded, and organized by the elements of mass, architecture comes into being.
Temple of Kailasnath at Ellora, near Aurangabad, India, A.D. 600-l000
The Pantheon, Rome, A.D. 120-124
FORM &amp; SPACE: THE UNITY OF OPPOSITES
Our visual field normally consists of heterogeneous elements that differ in shape, size, color, or orientation. 
To better comprehend the structure of a visual field, we tend to organize its elements into two opposing groups: positive elements, which are perceived as figures and negative elements, which provide a background for the figures.
Our perception and understanding of a composition depends on how we interpret the visual interaction between the positive and negative elements within its field. 
On this page, for example, letters are seen as dark figures against the white background of the paper surface. 
Consequently, we are able to perceive their organization into words, sentences, and paragraphs. 
In the diagrams to the left, the letter ¡°a¡± is seen as a figure not only because we recognize it as a letter in our alphabet but also because its profile is distinct, its value contrasts with that of its background, and its placement isolates it from its context.
As it grows in size relative to its field, however, other elements within and around it begin to compete for our attention as figures. 
At times, the relationship between figures and their background is so ambiguous that we visually switch their identities back and forth almost simultaneously.
White-on-Black or Black-on-White?
Two Faces or a Vase?
In all cases, however, we should understand that figures, the positive elements that attract our attention, could not exist without a contrasting background. 
Figures and their background, therefore, are more than opposing elements. 
Together, they form an inseparable reality¡ªa unity of opposites¡ªjust as the elements of form and space together form the reality of architecture.
Line defining the boundary between solid mass and spatial void
The form of solid mass rendered as a figure
The form of the spatial void rendered as a figure
Plan Diagrams, Taj Mahal, Agra, India, 1630-1653. 
Shah Jahan built this white marble mausoleum for his favorite wife, Muntaz Mahal.
Architectural form occurs at the juncture between mass and space. 
In executing and reading design drawings, we should be concerned with both the form of the mass containing a volume of space as well as the form of the spatial volume itself.
Fragment of a Map of Rome, drawn by Giambattista Nolli in 1748
 Depending on what we perceive to be positive elements, the figure-ground relationship of the forms of mass and space can be inverted in different parts of this map of Rome. 
In portions of the map, buildings appear to be positive forms that define street spaces. 
In other parts of the drawing, urban squares, courtyards, and major spaces within important public buildings read as positive elements seen against the background of the surrounding building mass.
The symbiotic relationship of the forms of mass and space in architecture can be examined and found to exist at several different scales. 
At each level, we should be concerned not only with the form of a building but also its impact on the space around it. 
At an urban scale, we should carefully consider whether the role of a building is to continue the existing fabric of a place, form a backdrop for other buildings, or define a positive urban space, or whether it might be appropriate for it to stand free as a significant object in space.
At the scale of a building site, there are various strategies for relating the form of a building to the space around it. 
A building can:
A. form a wall along an edge of its site and begin to define a positive outdoor space;
B. merge its interior space with the private outdoor space of a walled site;
C. enclose a portion of its site as an outdoor room and shelter it from undesirable climatic conditions; 
D. surround and enclose a courtyard or atrium space within its volume¡ª an introverted scheme. 
Monastery of St. Meletios on Mt. Kithairon, Greece, 9th century A.D. 
E. stand as a distinct object in space and dominate its site through its form and topographical positioning¡ªan extroverted scheme; 
F. stretch out and present a broad face to address a view, terminate an axis, or define an edge of an urban space; 
G. stand free within its site but extend its interior spaces to merge with private exterior spaces; 
H. stand as a positive form in a negative space.
Buildings Defining Space: Piazza San Marco, Venice
Building as an Object in Space: Boston City Hall, 1960, Kallmann, McKinnell &amp; Knowles
Building Embedded in the Landscape: Eyup Cultural Center, Istanbul, Turkey, 2013, EAA-Emre Arolat Architects 
Building Dominating the Landscape: Cooroy Art Temple, Cooroy Mountain, Australia, 2008, Paolo Denti JMA Architects 
Building as Landscape: Palafolls Public Library, Palafolls, Spain, 2009, Enric Miralles and Benedetta Tagliabue/Miralles Tagliabue EMBT 
Landscape as Building: Olympic Sculpture Park, Seattle Art Museum, Seattle, Washington, 2008, Weiss/Manfredi Architecture/Landscape/Urbanism 
At the scale of a building, we tend to read the configurations of walls as the positive elements of a plan. 
The white space in between, however, should not be seen simply as background for the walls, but also as figures in the drawing that have shape and form.
Even at the scale of a room, articles of furnishings can either stand as forms within a field of space or serve to define the form of a spatial field.
Seinajoki Theater, Finland,i968-1969, Alvar Aalto 
The form and enclosure of each space in a building either determines, or is determined by, the form of the spaces around it. 
In the Theater in Seinajoki by Alvar Aalto, for example, we can distinguish several categories of spatial forms and analyze how they interact. 
Each category has an active or passive role in defining space.
Some spaces, such as offices, have specific but similar functions and can be grouped into single, linear, or clustered forms.
Some spaces, such as concert halls, have specific functional and technical requirements, and require specific forms that will affect the forms of the spaces around them.
Some spaces, such as lobbies, are flexible in nature and can therefore be freely defined by the spaces or grouping of spaces around them.
FORM DEFINING SPACE
Square in Giron, Colombia, South America
When we place a two-dimensional figure on a piece of paper, it influences the shape of the white space around it. 
In a similar manner, any three-dimensional form naturally articulates the volume of space surrounding it and generates a field of influence or territory which it claims as its own. 
The following section of this chapter looks at horizontal and vertical elements of form and presents examples of how various configurations of these formal elements generate and define specific types of space.
HORIZONTAL ELEMENTS DEFINING SPACE
Base Plane 
A horizontal plane laying as a figure on a contrasting background defines a simple field of space. 
This field can be visually reinforced in the following ways.
Elevated Base Plane 
A horizontal plane elevated above the ground plane establishes vertical surfaces along its edges that reinforce the visual separation between its field and the surrounding ground.
Depressed Base Plane 
A horizontal plane depressed into the ground plane utilizes the vertical surfaces of the lowered area to define a volume of space.
Overhead Plane 
A horizontal plane located overhead defines a volume of space between itself and the ground plane.
For a horizontal plane to be seen as a figure, there must be a perceptible change in color, tone, or texture between its surface and that of the surrounding area.
The stronger the edge definition of a horizontal plane is, the more distinct will be its field.
Although there is a continuous flow of space across it, the field nevertheless generates a spatial zone or realm within its boundaries.
The surface articulation of the ground or floor plane is often used in architecture to define a zone of space within a larger context. 
The examples on the facing page illustrate how this type of spatial definition can be used to differentiate between a path of movement and places of rest, establish a field from which the form of a building rises out of the ground, or articulate a functional zone within a one-room living environment.
Street in Woodstock, Oxfordshire, England
Katsura Imperial Villa, Kyoto, Japan, 17th century
Parterre de Broderie, Palace of Versailles, France, 17th century, Andre Le Notre
Interior of Glass House, New Canaan, Connecticut, 1949, Philip Johnson
ELEVATED BASE PLANE
Elevating a portion of the base plane creates a specific domain within a larger spatial context. 
The changes in level that occur along the edges of the elevated plane define the boundaries of its field and interrupt the flow of space across its surface.
If the surface characteristics of the base plane continues up and across the elevated plane, then the field of the elevated plane will appear to be very much a part of the surrounding space. 
If, however, the edge condition is articulated by a change in form, color, or texture, then the field will become a plateau that is separate and distinct from its surroundings.
Fatehpur Sikri, Palace Complex of Akbar the Great, Mogul Emperor of India, 1569-1574. 
A special place is established by a platform in an artificial lake surrounded by the emperor¡¯s living and sleeping quarters.
The degree to which spatial and visual continuity is maintained between an elevated space and its surroundings depends on the scale of the level change.
The edge of the field is well-defined; visual and spatial continuity is maintained; physical access is easily accommodated.
Visual continuity is maintained; spatial continuity is interrupted; physical access requires the use of stairs or ramps.
Visual and spatial continuity is interrupted; the field of the elevated plane is isolated from the ground or floor plane; the elevated plane is transformed into a sheltering element for the space below.
The Acropolis, the cidatel of Athens, 5th century B.C.
Izumo Shrine, Shimane Prefecture, Japan, A. D. 717 (last rebuilt in 1744)
Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, Rome, 509 B.C.
Elevating a portion of the ground plane establishes a platform or podium that structurally and visually supports the form and mass of a building. 
The elevated ground plane can be a preexisting site condition, or it can be artificially constructed to deliberately raise a building above the surrounding context or enhance its image in the landscape. 
The examples on this and the preceding page illustrate how these techniques have been used to venerate sacred and honorific buildings.
Pavilion of Supreme Harmony (Taihe Dian) in the Forbidden City, Beijing, 1627
Temple Mountain, Bakong Temple, A.D. 881, Hariharalaya, Cambodia
Valhalla, near Regensburg, Germany, Leon von Klenze, 1830-1842
Private courtyard of the Imperial Palace, the Forbidden City, Beijing, China, 15th century 