As shown in Figure 3, in aggregate developing countries have more than double the hydropower potential of industrialized countries (Aqua-Media, 1997).
But whereas about 70% of that potential has been tapped in industrialized countries, less than 20% of that potential has been tapped in the developing world.
Since the demand for electricity in developing countries is expected to triple over the next 30 years, the outlook for hydropower would appear to be rosy.
Most estimates agree that by 2020, installed hydro capacity will also triple, from about the current 10% of technical usable potential to some 30% (Besant Jones, 1995).
A closer look at the industry, however, unearths deep problems, and many challenges.
Historically, hydroelectricity in the developing world has been financed predominantly from public or guaranteed funding.
During the last three decades, the World Bank has financed about 110 hydroelectric power projects in 50 developing countries.
These projects range from 6.6 MW to 2460 MW , with a combined generating capacity of about 35 000 MW.
Between 1990 and 1995 the Bank approved 12 hydropower projects, accounting for about $600 million a year of the total estimated investment in hydropower in developing countries of about $15 billion a year (Besant Jones, 1995).
Reliable global data on trends in hydro financing are not available.
However, World Bank data provide some pointers.
There has been a marked decline in World Bank lending for hydro - over the course of the 1990s, hydro has fallen by about 25% as a share of Bank lending - from 3.4% to 2.5% of the approximately $20 billion lent annually.
There is no doubt that environmental pressures on the Bank (and other multilateral agencies) account for some of this decline; accordingly, it is not clear whether this decline mirrors a parallel shift in spending on hydro by developing countries.
W hat seems more likely (and for which there is ample anecdotal evidence) is that, since money is fungible, developing countries have simply taken 'the path of least resistance', using their own resources for these controversial investments, and submitting projects to the World Bank (and other external support agencies) which are more politically palatable to the western countries who dominate the Boards of these agencies.
Whatever the actual numbers on current (mostly public) spending on hydro, it is obvious that capacity expansion will require the mobilization of both public and private finance and the forging of new partnerships between the two.
The private sector has shown some interest in funding hydroelectricity.
The International Finance Corporation (the private sector arm of the World Bank) approved financing for seven private hydroelectric power projects, between 1990 and early 1995; six of these were relatively small (10 MW to 73 MW), and one was a large (450 MW) run-of-river project (Besant Jones, 1995).
This profile is broadly consistent with overall private sector involvement in hydro - 68% of private hydro projects are small projects (less than 100 MW).
(But the aggregate private investment in small plants is only 16% of the total.)
Besides development of new capacity, the private sector has also shown considerable interest in buying, retrofitting, rehabilitating and operating existing hydroelectric plant (Churchill, 1997a, 1997b), with this process particularly active in Brazil and other Latin American countries (see Figure 4).
Between 1990 and 1995, about $25 billion a year was invested by the private sector in infrastructure in developing countries.
About 35% of this (or about $9 billion a year) was in the power sector, and about 12% of this (about $1 billion a year) in hydro.
This implies that the private sector has financed only about 7% of the $15 billion invested in hydro in developing countries each year.
World Bank data show that power generation projects have not always performed well (Besant Jones, 1995): schedule slippage has averaged about 38% for thermal projects and 35% for hydroelectric projects.
Cost overruns have averaged about 11% for therm al plants but 30% for hydroelectric projects.
Some of this poor performance can be attributed to the generic 'public works hazard', in which there is little sanction for high costs and poor performance.
But as the difference between public thermal and hydro plants suggests, there are also a much larger variety of risk factors - hydrologic, geologic and environmental- associated with hydro plants.
The allocation and assignment of risk is a central topic to which we return later; here it is only pertinent to note that it is possible to structure private sector projects to specifically address the problem s of cost overruns and delays.
In recent independent hydropower projects in Colombia, India and Guatemala, for example, a major portion of the project developers¡¯ return on equity comes from delivering the project on time and within budget (Churchill, 1997a).
Hydropower advocates (reasonably) portray hydropower as an indigenous, renewable, non-polluting and long-lived peak energy resource more deserving of foreign investment than many thermal projects which (Ulfsby, 1997) "when based on imported equipment and fuel...are no more than a long-term contract for the import of electricity".
The reality, however, is that hydro, in the words of an influential energy analyst (Churchill, 1997a): stands at a crossroads?
On the one hand, project owners face increasing economic, environmental and financial challenges.
There are the vocal and visible attacks by environmental interest groups on hydro projects, particularly those with large dams.
There is competition from alternative energy sources.
In only a few years, the natural gas-fueled combustion engine has become a dominant technology for producing electricity.
Its physical and economic characteristics are almost the opposite of those of hydro- project capital costs are relatively low and predictable with a high degree of accuracy; construction times are short; and fuel/operating costs are high. And there is the drying up of inexpensive public financing for energy projects.
There is no doubt that private financing will play a major role in the future of the power sector- one leading energ y thinker suggests that in the future 90% of power financing will come from the private sector (Barnevik, 1997).
How does the private sector view investments in hydro?
The short answer is 'warily', because of a number of substantial risks, many of which are inherent in the degree to which each and every hydro project has (unlike thermal projects) to be tailored to specific hydrological, geographical and geological conditions.
When a private financier looks at hydro (Trembath, 1997), he sees the following:
substantial market growth, in contrast with the situation in industrialized countries; but
a wide variety of legal and regulatory environments, with some markets better structured and less risky than others;
there is a lot of work (and associated high costs) in preparing a project to the stage where it can be costed by a prospective developer within a reasonable degree of certainty;
a necessity (see Figure 5) for a complex set of partnerships (Ulfsby, 1997), even in relatively simple projects;
even at the bid stage there is typically considerable cost estimate risk from geological and hydrological uncertainties, as well as uncertainties (and often shifting goalposts) due to costs of environmental mitigation and resettlement;
costs are recovered from these capital-intensive projects over a design life typically two or three times longer than that of a thermal plant, with consequent exposure to greater uncertainty (not least due to political changes);
a dearth of the long-maturity financial instruments which are necessary for hydro;
little ability to attract export credits, the major source of financing for thermal plants, which have about four times more dollars of equipment than a hydro plant per megawatt of capacity and, therefore, greater dependence on multilateral agencies sources, who are subject to a variety of political pressures and have become less than reliable partners, for financing or guarantees;
the considerable hydro resources located in poorer countries or regions are often far in excess of their needs. While there is often demand in adjacent countries or regions, there is considerable friction in cross-border marketing due to both lack of infrastructure and lack of well-established purchase rules.
The net effect is that the private sector correctly sees hydro projects, relative to thermal power projects, as fraught with risks.
With countries and utilities increasingly turning to the private sector to fund and build such projects, that perceived high financial risk will discourage investment.
An important reality is that these risks are typically quite different in smaller and larger projects.
It is relatively easy to involve the private sector in smaller projects, specifically chosen to have minimal geological, hydrological and environmental risks.
Consequently, the typical private sector hydropower plant is an environmentally benign, high head, run-of-river plant between 40 and 400 MW located on the tributaries to the big rivers (Ulfsby, 1997).
For larger projects there has been, and will be, little private sector financing unless there is substantial involvement of governments and bilateral and multilateral agencies in co-financing such projects and in assuming some of the risks (by, for instance, funding upstream sector planning and project preparation activities, and by providing partial risk guarantees) (Trem bath, 1997).
It should be noted that traditional financing by governments and through bilateral and multilateral banks addressed most of these difficulties.
Development costs were financed through technical assistance loans and credits and through project preparation facilities (Trembath, 1997).
Construction uncertainties were addressed by the 'schedule of rates' form of contract and price variation clauses which passed as much as possible of the risk of unknown conditions to the project owner.
Owners, usually with the backing of their governments, shouldered the responsibility for cost overruns.
While there were certainly moral hazards abounding in such arrangements, in many cases this made sense since the risks were borne by the party best able to diversify the risk, which in the case of hydro development was the (usually public) owner.
Grace periods and maturities accommodated the longer construction period and payback periods (Trembath, 1997).
What, then, needs to be done to harness the immense potential for hydro power as a source of socially sensitive and environmentally benign electricity generation in developing countries?
The development of hydropower will, to be sure, require much greater participation of the private sector in project development, management and operation.
But it will also require substantial, continued involvement of official development assistance- in helping set internationally accepted standards on when dams are appropriate investments and how to plan, design, build and operate them (the mandate of the World Commission on Dams, chaired by the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry from South Africa, and including commissioners representing the full range of views on the appropriateness of large dams (World Commission on Dams, 1998)); in financing construction-intensive plants; in providing private investors with comfort with regard to political risk through partial-risk guarantees; in facilitating cross-border power sharing and sale agreements.
Although official development assistance still provides substantial financing to the power sector, the prognosis is not good.
The World Bank¡¯s lending- often a 'leading indicator' in the development business- shows hydropower¡¯s share declining by 25% over the past five years.
And agencies such as the UK¡¯s Department for International Development have a policy of 'avoiding large capital projects' (Department for International Development, 1997).
There is a general perception that official development assistance for power generation is a 'sunset sector', and that responsibility can be handed over to the private sector.
The realities of global environmental politics (to which development agencies are highly susceptible) also play an important role.
For this combination of reasons there is an implicit belief that a 'phased withdrawal' of official development assistance from the hydropower sector has started.
If this trend is sustained, then the private sector of its own volition will confine its activities primarily to the small, low-risk niche of the hydro spectrum and w ill concentrate on 'private-sector-friendly' thermal power instead.
This will mean that the overall low level of development of hydro potential will persist in many developing countries.
Conclusions
At first glance, the hydropower industry would appear to face a rosy future in developing countries.
Potential in developing countries is huge and only a small fraction (less than 10% in Asia, Latin America and Africa, versus about 70% in Europe and North America) has been tapped.