His tattoos
To him, opening the door of his stepdaughter's house, the woman looks old; much too old to be going out with Stevie.
But it is certainly her; he has seen the photos.
He says hello too loudly and she hurries through the door followed by her three kids, all four of them dripping wet from the rain.
The children - two girls, one boy - rush off into the living room and she removes her jacket. A strip of puddingy flesh is visible; a pierced naval.
He takes her damp jacket and hangs it on the banister, commiserating with her about the weather.
She is attractive, but Stevie should be going with girls his own age, not this Louise woman with her kids and her tired eyes.
How old is she anyway?
Twenty-eight? Thirty?
Too old for Stevie, anyway. Much too old.
He tries to introduce himself but before he can, Louise plants a surprising kiss on his cheek.
"I've been dying to meet you, Harry," she says. "Steve talks about you all the time."
"Really?" Harry says. "Well don't believe it, love. It's all lies."
The two of them laugh.
When he was on the doors, he went for women like her: shapely, thick lipped, mouthy.
He tries hard not to look at the swell of her breasts and the St Christopher that nestles there; the tongue stud that bobs in her mouth.
From the top of the stairs, Rhonda looks down.
"Is that Steven?" She says.
"Hi Ron," Louise says. "No, Steve's on his way. He's running late."
"Oh," Rhonda says. "Probably just as well, really. We're still wrapping his presents up here."
Behind her, Harry's wife, Eva, waves.
To him, pushing past the spray of balloons as they enter the sitting room.
It's clear that Stevie's in the pub. No question about it.
Louise says hello to Rhonda's husband Bill, who's got the kids jumping all over him already, then sits down on the sofa.
There is no smile on Bill's face.
His nickname has been Michelin since school because of his weight.
Bill nods a hello in Louise's direction and goes back to defending himself from the kids.
No one's quite sure why they love him so much.
While Rhonda is upstairs with Eva, Harry is expected to be in charge.
Bill won't leave his chair except to piss, so it's down to Harry to offer Louise a drink.
She asks for a lager.
As he's about to get to the kitchen, she tells him again that it's great to meet him and that Steve talks about him all the time.
"What'll the kids have," Harry says.
"Coke!" The kids scream.
To him, taking two cans and a bottle of Coke from the fridge, Louise's voice sounds gentler than he expected; soft, he thinks, like the hairs on her arms look.
He opens one of the cans and one of the kids falls off Bill's bulk and starts to cry.
Louise pleads with them all to behave.
They're bored already and the rain's still pouring so they won't be let out any time soon.
Outside, the bouncy castle that Rhonda paid all that money for, scrimped all those months for is slowly deflating, rain-bounced and drab under the grey afternoon sky.
To him, looking at it shivering in the rain, it's a fucking waste of money, but still looks like fun.
He thinks that after a few beers he'd probably have had a bounce on it. A bounce on it with the kids, like he used to bounce on that space hopper he bought for Stevie.
Stevie used to watch Harry bouncing around on it like some fat kangaroo, laughing and snorting like it was the funniest thing he'd ever seen.
He was always laughing, was Stevie.
To him, taking the drinks through and passing them one by one, it's obvious that the kids are staring at his arms.
There are illustrations there; poorly rendered prison tattoos.
Usually he tries to cover them, but because it's hot and stuffy his shirtsleeves are rolled up.
The kids can see a skull, a naked woman, his name, the cockerel crest of his football team.
He only thinks about them when people notice, and normally they don't.
The children take their drinks and suck their Cokes through the straws.
He passes Bill a can and Louise a glass.
"You not having one, Harry?" Louise says.
He claps his palm to his widow's peak.
"I'd forget me own head," he says, walking back into the kitchen.
"Could you bring us through some crisps, too, please, Slam?" Bill says.
Harry nods.
"Thanks, Slam," he says.
To him, taking a can from the fridge and picking up a bowl of crisps, being called Slam reminds him that he's home.
Everyone around here knows him as Slam from his time on the doors - Harry the Slam.
There used to be stories about Harry, stories he'd let settle without straightening out the truth.
People thought he was hard but fair and he liked that.
The women did too.
He passes the crisps to Bill who starts eating them by the fistful, though the kids are trying to pinch some too.
Harry opens his beer and sits next to Louise.
"So, love, where is he then?" Harry asks Louise.
"In the pub I expect."
"No, not in the pub," she says tightly.
"He promised me that. He'll be here by three, is what he said."
"I'm looking forward to seeing the lad. It's been too long."
"He is too," she says. "He's just been busy, that's all."
To him, taking out his rolling tobacco, it sounds like an excuse.
If he knows Stevie he'll be in the Antelope, wishing he didn't have to spend his twenty-first birthday at his mum's.
There are so many sandwiches, things on sticks and shop-bought cakes covering the kitchen that Harry can't even begin to reckon the cost.
He licks the adhesive strip on his cigarette and hears Eva and Rhonda clatter down the stairs.
They say hello to everyone and kiss the kids.
They are red-cheeked and giggly from the Pomagne.
Eva introduces herself to Louise and sits down next to Harry.
"It's so nice to finally meet you, Louise," she says. "I feel like I know you already!"
"Me too," Louise says, though Harry suspects she's lying. "When did you make it down?" She says.
"Last night. We got the train.
It only took us an hour and a half, didn't it, Harry? We do try to come back as much as we can, but my mother, you know?"
"Yeah. Steve did say she's been in the hospital," Louise says. Eva paws the air.
Don't even mention it.
"She's been out for a month or so now, but the woman never stops complaining, does she, Harry? From morning to night, there's aches and pains and god knows what else.
She can't see some days and others she says she can't eat, or there's things wrong with her waterworks . . ."
"How old is she?" Louise asks, wafting away the smoke from Harry's cigarette.
"Ninety-one in September," Eva says.
To him, smoking his roll-up, there's a lot to be said about coming home.
He hates living with his mother-in-law, not because he doesn't like her - they actually have a bit of a laugh when Eva isn't around - but because he hates the drab estate, the people he doesn't know, the anonymity of it all.
"So do you miss it?" Louise says, like she's reading his thoughts.
He rubs his chin.
"I miss the people, I suppose. And I miss Stevie. So yeah, I suppose I do."
"I'd leave here tomorrow," she says. "If it wasn't for the kids and for Steve, and . . . well, given half of one I'd leave just like that."
To him, drumming his fingers on the arm of the chair, the waiting has become excruciating.
The kids are moaning, already acting up.
Eva is quietly panicked.
Louise just drinks her lager and occasionally looks at her outsized watch.
No one else has arrived.
Rhonda is flitting about the place as the rain lashes the window panes.
"We've got loads of people coming, you know?" Rhonda says to no one in particular. "I do hope there'll be enough food."
"There'll be enough food, love," Eva says. "There's more food in there than up at the Asda."
They both laugh and Louise excuses herself to got to the bathroom.
For a moment, Harry feels lost, then he looks down at the floor. Sat by his leg is Louise's eldest child, Sam.
He is alone reading a comic.
"What's that you're reading there?" Harry asks.
"Hulk," the kid says.
"Don't make me angry," Harry says. "You won't like me when I'm angry."
The kid looks alarmed and retreats still further behind the comic.
He finishes his cigarette and stubs it out.
Louise returns and smiles sweetly.
Harry smiles back.
If he were twenty years younger.
To him, leaning across to get Louise's attention, it doesn't matter that Stevie's not here.
Let the lad have his fun, he thinks.
Then the doorbell goes.
Everyone pauses, even the kids.
Rhonda is in the kitchen.
Harry gets up and pats Eva on the leg.
"I'll go," he says loudly and gets the door. It is another bunch of kids and a couple he doesn't recognise.
"Hi there," the man says. "Ste said for us to pop round."
He is chisel haired and dressed in faded jeans and a football jersey.
"You must be Harry, right?" He says holding out his hand. "I'm Glen. And this is Donna. Ste talks about you all the time, you know that?"
"It's all lies," Harry says with a thin smile and shows them in.
Donna is hard faced; her mascara has run: she looks like she's been punched. She looks familiar.
Harry, half ashamedly, wonders whether he fucked her mum once.
To him, wedged in the kitchen eating a sausage roll, the place is already too full.
And there isn't enough food, and Stevie still hasn't turned up.
In the lounge, there are people dancing and outside the rain has finally stopped.
Eva and Rhonda are standing by the cooker, talking about the father of Louise's kids.
Harry wonders how that man feels about Stevie looking after these kids. It must rip him up inside to see Stevie about with them.
Buying them sweets, taking them places. He used to take Stevie up to the park to watch the kites. He used to buy him sweets too.
Bill was in and out of the hospital back then, and Harry liked the little adventures he and Stevie used to have: the afternoons sat outside the Antelope. People asked if it was his son and he didn't correct them.
To him, brushing crumbs from the front of his shirt, those days seem a lifetime ago. He looks around and feels like he needs some air.
He pushes past a group of people he doesn't recognise and taps Rhonda on the shoulder.
"You think I should get the bouncy castle up and running? Rain's stopped."
She nods.
"Good idea," she says, but doesn't move.
"I'll get it started then," he says.
To him, standing looking at the puddles settled in the plastic tubing, it would probably be better if Stevie didn't come at all.
He wonders whether it would be the right thing to do to warn the boy off. It would be their secret.
He imagines what would happen if he did.
He wonders what Louise would look like all fierce and spiteful.