Where the Red Fern Grows (by Wilson Rawls)
I SUPPOSE THERE'S A TIME IN PRACTICALLY EVERY YOUNG boy's life when he's affected by that wonderful disease of puppy love.
I don't mean the kind a boy has for the pretty little girl that lives down the road.
I mean the real kind, the kind that has four small feet and a wig-gly tail, and sharp little teeth that can gnaw on a boy's finger; the kind a boy can romp and play with, even eat and sleep with.
I was ten years old when I first became infected with this terrible disease.
I'm sure no boy in the world had it worse than I did.
It's not easy for a young boy to want a dog and not be able to have one.
It starts gnawing on his heart, and gets all mixed up in his dreams.
It gets worse and worse, until finally it becomes almost unbearable.
If my dog-wanting had been that of an ordinary boy, I'm sure my mother and father would have gotten me a puppy, but my wants were different.
I didn't want just one dog.
I wanted two, and not just any kind of a dog.
They had to be a special kind and a special breed.
I had to have some dogs.
I went to my father and had a talk with him.
He scratched his head and thought it over.
"Well, Billy," he said, "I heard that Old Man Hatfield's collie is going to have pups.
I'm sure I can get one of them for you."
He may as well have poured cold water on me.
"Papa," I said, "I don't want an old collie dog.
I want hounds-coon hounds-and I want two of them."
I could tell by the look on his face that he wanted to help me, but couldn't.
He said, "Billy, those kind of dogs cost money, and that's something we don't have right now.
Maybe some day when we can afford it, you can have them, but not right now."
I didn't give up.
After my talk with Papa, I went to Mama.
I fared no better there.
Right off she said I was too young to be hunting with hounds.
Besides, a hunter needed a gun, and that was one thing I couldn't have, not until I was twenty-one anyway.
I couldn't understand it.
There I was sitting right in the middle of the finest hunting country in the world and I didn't even have a dog.
Our home was in a beautiful valley far back in the rugged Ozarks.
The country was new and sparsely settled.
The land we lived on was Cherokee land, allotted to my mother because of the Cherokee blood that flowed in her veins.
It lay in a strip from the foothills of the mountains to the banks of the Illinois Biver in northeastern Oklahoma.
The land was rich, black, and fertile.
Papa said it would grow hair on a crosscut saw.
He was the first man to stick the cold steel point of a turning plow into the virgin soil.
Mama had picked the spot for our log house.
It nestled at the edge of the foothills in the mouth of a small canyon, and was surrounded by a grove of huge red oaks.
Behind our house one could see miles and miles of the mighty Ozarks.
In the spring the aromatic scent of wild flowers, redbuds, papaws, and dogwoods,drifting on the wind currents, spread over the valley and around our home.
Below our fields, twisting and winding, ran the clear blue waters of the Illinois River.
The banks were cool and shady.
The rich bottom land near the river was studded with tall sycamores, birches, and box elders.
To a ten-year-old country boy it was the most beautiful place in the whole wide world, and I took advantage of it all.
I roamed the hills and the river bottoms.
I knew every game trail in the thick cane-brakes, and every animal track that was pressed in the mud along the riverbanks.
The ones that fascinated me the most were the baby-like tracks of a river coon.
I'd lie for hours examining them.
Before leaving, I'd take a switch and sweep them all away.
These I called my "trail looks."
The next day I'd hurry back, and sure enough, nine times out of ten, there in the clean-swept ground I would again find the tracks of a ringtail coon.
I knew he had passed over the trail during the night.
I could close my eyes and almost see him, humped up and waddling along, fishing under the banks with his delicate little paws for crawfish, frogs, and minnows.
I was a hunter from the time I could walk.
I caught lizards on the rail fences, rats in the corncrib, and frogs in the little creek that ran through the fields. I was a young Daniel Boone.
As the days passed, the dog-wanting disease grew worse.
I began to see dogs in my sleep.
I went back to my father and mother.
It was the same old story.
Good hounds cost money, and they just didn't have it.
My dog-wanting became so bad I began to lose weight and my food didn't taste good any more.
Mama noticed this and she had a talk with Papa.
"You're going to have to do something," she said. "I never saw a boy grieve like that.
It's not right, not right at all."
"I know," said Papa, "and I feel just as badly as you do, but what can I do? You know we don't have that kind of money."
"I don't care," said Mama. "You've got to do something.
I can't stand to see him cry like that.
Besides he's getting to be a problem.
I can't get my work done.
He follows me around all day long begging for hounds."
"I offered to get him a dog," said Papa, "but he doesn't want just any kind of dog.
He wants hounds, and they cost money.
Do you know what the Parker boys paid for those two hounds they bought? Seventy-five dollars!
If I had that much money, I'd buy another mule.
I sure do need one."
I had overheard this conversation from another room.
At first it made me feel pretty good.
At least I was getting to be a problem.
Then I didn't feel so good.
I knew my mother and father were poor and didn't have any money.
I began to feel sorry for them and myself.
After thinking it over, I figured out a way to help.
Even though it was a great sacrifice, I told Papa I had decided I didn't want two hounds.
One would be enough.
I saw the hurt in his eyes.
It made me feel like someone was squeezing water out of my heart.
Papa set me on his lap and we had a good talk.
He told me how hard times were, and that it looked like a man couldn't get a fair price for anything he raised.
Some of the farmers had quit farming and were cutting railroad ties so they could feed their families.
If things didn't get better, that's what he'd have to do.
He said he'd give anything if he could get some good hounds for me, but there didn't seem to be any way he could right then.
I went off to bed with my heart all torn up in little pieces, and cried myself to sleep.
The next day Papa had to go to the store.
Late that evening I saw him coming back.
As fast as I could, I ran to meet him, expecting a sack of candy.
Instead he handed me three small steel traps.
If Santa Claus himself had come down out of the mountains, reindeer and all, I would not have been more pleased.
I jumped up and down, and cried a whole bucketful of tears.
I hugged him and told him what a wonderful papa he was.
He showed me how to set them by mashing the spring down with my foot, and how to work the trigger.
I took them to bed with me that night.
The next morning I started trapping around the barn.
The first thing I caught was Samie, our house cat.
If this didn't cause a commotion! I didn't intend to catch him.
I was trying to catch a rat, but somehow he came nosing around and got in my trap.
My sisters started bawling and yelling for Mama.
She came running, wanting to know what in the world was going on.
None of us had to tell her, Samie told her with his spitting and squalling.
He was mad.
He couldn't understand what that thing was that was biting his foot, and he was making an awful fuss about it.
His tail was as big as a wet corncob and every hair on his small body was sticking straight up.
He spit and yowled and dared anyone to get close to him.
My sisters yelled their fool heads off, all the time saying, "Poor Samie! Poor Samie!"
Mama shushed them up and told me to go get the forked stick from under the clothesline.
I ran and got it.
Mama was the best helper a boy ever had.
She put the forked end over Samie's neck and pinned him to the ground.
It was bad enough for the trap to be biting his foot, but to have his neck pinned down that way was too much.
He threw a fit. I never heard such a racket in all my life.
It wasn't long until everything on the place was all spooked up.
The chickens started cackling and flew way up on the hillside.
Daisy, our milk cow, all but tore the barn lot up and refused to give any milk that night.
Sloppy Ann, our hog, started running in circles, squealing and grunting.
Samie wiggled and twisted. He yowled and spit, but it didn't do him any good.
Mama was good and stout. She held him down, tight to the ground.
I ran in and put my foot on the trap spring, mashed it down, and released his foot.
With one loud squall, he scooted under the barn.
After it was all over, Mama said, "I don't think you'll have any more trouble with that cat. I think he has learned his lesson."
How wrong Mama was.
Samie was one of those nosy kind of cats.
He would lie up on the red oak limbs and watch every move I made.
I found some slick little trails out in our garden down under some tall hollyhocks.
Thinking they were game trails, and not knowing they were Samie's favorite hunting trails, I set my traps.
Samie couldn't understand what I was doing out there, messing around his hunting territory. He went to investigate.
It wasn't long until I had him limping with all four feet.
Every time Papa saw Samie lying around in the warm sun with his feet wrapped up in turpentine rags, he would laugh until big tears rolled down his cheeks.
Mama had another talk with Papa. She said he was going to have to say something to me, because if I caught that cat one more time, it would drive her out of her mind.
Papa told me to be a little more careful where I set my traps.
"Papa," I said, "I don't want to catch Samie, but he's the craziest cat I ever saw.
He sees everything I do, and just has to go sniffing around."
Papa looked over at Samie.
He was lying all sprawled out in the sunshine with all four paws bandaged and sticking straight up. His long tail was swishing this way and that.