Waiting
He found her inside his house, the pale stone house that perched on the last bit of greenish grass before the Waste, the house that stood so far away from any other house that it might as well have been the only house in the world.
He had gone hunting, as he often did in the morning and at dusk, gone hunting with his bow and his spear, though not his sword.
He had been in the Waste that morning, because there had been no rabbits in the hills of tufted grass to the east, and no hill birds either.
But there had been tracks leading into the Waste, small paw prints that might belong to one of the striped animals that lived there.
He had killed one, caught it against one of the razored rocks of the Waste.
And after that, when the sun had begun to burn against his neck, when the heat rose from the ground like perfume from a woman's skin, he opened the door to his house and found her.
She was thin, as thin as a shaft of midwinter sunlight in the forests of the east, and tall, nearly as tall as he was.
Black hair hung just past her ears, the edges as sharp as the rocks of the Waste.
He could see the tautness of her shoulders, the curve of the muscles of her arms and legs, because she was naked.
She stood with her back to him, staring at the back wall of his house.
Two empty brackets were set there, and that morning a sword - his own sword, the sword of his father and his father before him - had hung on them. Now they were empty.
The door creaked softly as he pushed it farther open.
The sound seemed to fill the house, and then she was moving, moving like water, like the cold rushing of a mountain stream. She whirled, one arm reaching for something near her side that wasn't there, and it made her stumble.
But then her fists were up, ready to fight, the stumble forgotten.
Her eyes fixed on him, still and hard, and he saw that they were blue.
"This is my house," he said.
Her hands didn't lower, and he could see her bare feet tense against the stone floor.
"Where?" The word sliced past him.
"At the edge of the Waste."
Her blue eyes widened.
"Which part?"
"The nearest town is Farbrook, and it's fifteen days on a horse.
A good horse."
Her mouth opened slightly as she breathed.
"Are you alone here?"
He nodded, and her eyes flicked around the house.
One of his skinning knives lay on a table near the bed, and she sprang, or flowed, or stalked, across the space to pick it up.
"I won't hurt you," he said. "As long as you aren't here to rob me. Though there's little enough to take."
Though perhaps, he thought, she was there to do just that, because it seemed she had already taken his sword, though where she had hidden it he could not see.She laughed.
She threw her head back, showing the long length of her white neck, and she laughed, and when she was done, the tension in her body had fled.
She held the knife loosely, at her side.
"What's your name?" she asked."Affric."
"Affric what?"
He tilted his head.
"Affric Thalens."
Again her eyes scanned the room, pausing on the trunk in the corner, the one with the insignia of the royal army still etched into its wood.
He had once thought to gouge it out, but that had been a long time ago, and as time passed in the silence of the Waste, he had forgotten.
"Is that all?" He nodded.
"Should there be more?"
One side of her mouth pulled in, and she shrugged with one shoulder.
"You live alone in the Waste, where few would live without fear.
Yet you look unafraid.
You might be Affric Silver-Arrow, Affric Flame-Spear, Affric Spinning-Dagger."
He shook his head slowly.
"I've never met anyone with a name like that."
He heard the hitch of her breath in her chest.
Her forehead creased, and the tip of the knife, which she had been moving in lazy circles, went still.
"I've heard them, in stories, in histories," he said quickly, but the sudden look of fear on her face - an odd, sharp look, as if she had rarely felt such a thing before - did not disappear.
"How long?" she asked, and her voice was ragged.
"How long since what?"
Now she took a step toward him, the knife suddenly raised in her hand, its blade toward him.
"How long since names like that were used?"
Affric pursed his lips.
"Two hundred years. Since before the empire fell."
The knife did not drop to the flagstone floor.
But he saw it tremble in her hand before she raised her chin and snapped, "Get me some clothes."
They ate from the animal he had killed, once he had roasted a bit of it over the fire.
She wore one of his shirts, a shirt that had once been blue but had faded until the color could not be named, and a pair of his breeches.
Outside the house, night came.
Inside, the flames from the hearth fire illuminated his face, but she sat far away from him, on the floor in the shadow of the room's corner.
"What do you know of Maura Bright-Blade?" she asked out of the darkness that surrounded her.
Affric swallowed, taking a drink from his mug to wash down the meat.
In his mind, he saw the thick books of his father's study, the fat tomes of combat and histories of warriors.
"She was a swordsman," he said finally. "The best of her time.
She served the Emperor Janken, led his warriors into battle. Won the battles, all of them.
They say she was like a blade herself, as sharp and keen-edged and quick, as if she were made of steel and lightning.
She disappeared.
They looked, but they never found her."
She stepped out of the darkness, coming forward to hook her ankle around the empty stool that stood beside his one chair and sit on it. A bit of grease shone on her bottom lip, but she didn't wipe it away.
"She was turned into a sword."
"What?"
The firelight danced over her face, over the steep lines of her cheekbones.
"She knew a man, a wizard. Blaise Vanadric.
He was the best wizard and she was the best swordsman.
When they were together, it was like a storm, with all the noise and motion and the lovely calm afterward.
For a while, it was good.
But he began to hate it when she left him, hate the way her eyes shone before a battle, because they weren't shining for him.
He asked her - he told her - to stop, to give up her name and be simply Maura.
"She said no. He asked again, and she refused.
And then - " She paused, her eyes behind Affric, on the high, dark corner of the room.
"He said it was justice, because I didn't love him.
All I loved was killing, so I would kill and kill, forever.
As a sword, the perfect sword, one that would never lose a battle, just as I had never lost a battle.
That it would only end if someone were willing to lay the sword aside.
And who would lay aside a sword that never lost?"
Affric thought of his sword, thought of the runes etched upon it, of how he had never lost a fight, nor his father nor grandfather before him.
Then he looked at the wall near his bed, at the place where the empty brackets hung.
He found that she knew how to hunt, knew from countless campaigns waged years before his father's father had been born.
But she didn't know how to hunt in the Waste. She didn't know to watch for the rock spiders as large as barn cats, and she didn't know where to look for the brown spotted lizards that sunned on certain rocks.
So he taught her, taught her to hunt under the sky that was never gray, under the bright, hot sun.
The lizards could be eaten, but hardly fought back; she preferred hunting the striped beasts that crossed from the hills into the Waste or the large-eared deer that sometimes wandered over the grasslands.
She knew how to skin what she caught - the blade flashed in her hands, quicker than even his own - and how to cook it over a fire outdoors.
She knew how to mend small tears in the clothes he gave her.
But she didn't know how to fix a roof, or keep sand and dirt from the Waste out of the house, or simply sit and watch the evening come down out of the sky.
The silence seemed to weigh on her, there in the house on the edge of the Waste.
Only the wind broke it, and the sound of dirt and gravel shifting over the rocks.
It had pressed on him, when he first came there, but then he had forgotten it, forgotten to listen to it, or learned how to.
He tried to talk, to cover up the silence, but he had been alone a long time.
More often he simply watched her.
She reminded him of a cat.
Not a house cat, not a mouser in a barn in some green forest town, but a lioness or a jungle panther.
Power coiled behind every movement, fearlessness quickened every step.
Soon she hunted better than he did, because she held nothing of herself back, even if they merely hunted rabbits.
He learned the sound of her laugh, edged and sharp, then full and low.
She was quick to laugh, and quick to yell.
He learned to watch for her blue eyes to go dark, nearly black with temper, and to get out of the way if they did.
He memorized the scars on her arms, the thin white mark on her cheek, learned their stories.
Sometimes he thought he saw her watching him.
Every day he thought she would leave.
He could see that it rubbed at her, the silence, the loneliness, made her seem to itch in her own skin.
Every morning, he expected to wake and find her gone.
"Why did you come here?" she asked.
They were harvesting small red fruits from the short, twisted trees that grew along the creek that flowed to the edge of the Waste and then cut away from it, too scared to enter.
When they were finished, he would show her how to remove the white seeds, the ones that could cause a large man to fall down frothing.
The fruits were good, once the seeds were gone.
He laid a fruit in his basket, then looked at her.
She had split one of the fruits with her nail, so that red juice ran down her hand to her wrist.
It made his ears ring, a little, when he thought of the story of himself coming to the Waste, and he thought about not answering.
But she was watching him, watching him with her blue eyes, and he knew that if he did not tell her now, she would not ask again.
"I was a soldier," he said finally. "A swordsman.
I was good at it, because I trained hard, and because I had a sword that never lost a fight.
I fought for the king, fought for him for years.
And then, one day, I didn't want to anymore."
Her eyes narrowed, as if she suspected him of lying.
How, he thought, was Maura Bright-Blade to understand why he had left behind everything to come and live at the edge of the Waste?