The Russian Riviera
"Some businessmen" was how Skinny Zyama had described the two gangsters from New Jersey.
"You want me there for a meeting with businessmen?" Kostya had asked.
"You have other plans on a Wednesday afternoon?"
"No."
"Wear a jacket," Zyama had said.
Now, stationed as instructed beside Skinny Zyama's mahogany desk, Kostya appraised the gangsters.
Zyama had placed two leather armchairs in front of his desk, but only the smaller of the two had consented to sit.
The larger one, the one doing all the talking, had turned his chair sideways and perched himself on its arm.
Instinctively, Kostya gauged each man's weight.
They were both wearing suits, but that made no difference.
Kostya had been conditioned by years at the gym, and his mind conjured up a man's weight and class just as, seeing an apple, it conjured up taste and smell.
He'd barely considered the gangsters before his mind had announced: Sixty-four kilos and eighty-five kilos; welterweight and cruiserweight.
This was one of his few demonstrable skills - which, like the others, had brought him little profit.
The larger gangster looked powerful through the back and shoulders, but he carried himself arrogantly, gestured excessively with his hands, and punctuated his demands by thrusting out his chin.
In contrast, the smaller one hardly moved at all.
He kept his hands folded in his lap and followed the conversation with his eyes.
His neck and his ankles were thin, and he was pale in the manner of someone who is either very sick or very spartan.
Of the two, Kostya supposed that the smaller man posed the greater danger, though, to be precise, the greatest danger was posed by neither of them.
The greatest danger was posed by Skinny Zyama, who had assumed an obnoxious air of invulnerability.
"These are competitive times.
You could benefit from our help," the larger gangster said.
"The place is busy four nights a week," Zyama said.
"Impossible to get a table Friday or Saturday without a reservation.
We have the best Vegas-style floor show in the city. Professional dancers trained in Russia.
Where's my competition?"
"There are other restaurants.
They could become more successful."
"The other restaurants are run by imbeciles.
Their customers are people who couldn't get a table here."
"With the right guidance, those restaurants could improve.
With connections, they could attract popular entertainers from New York and New Jersey."
"Listen, Alla Pugacheva and Arkady Raikin could perform every Saturday night for a month and those idiots would still find a way to lose money."
"There are other possibilities.
Something unfortunate could happen to your restaurant or to you."
Zyama, who had been reclining in his suede admiral's chair, tilted forward and made a production of looking the gangster in the eye.
"You think you're the first ones to come in here? Understand: I'm in business all these years not because I give money to every hoodlum with his hand out."
Kostya watched the larger gangster unbutton his jacket and slide his hand inside.
Cursing Skinny Zyama, Kostya took a step in the gangster's direction.
If the man had a gun, there wasn't much he could do about it, but he knew that if the gangster motioned toward his pocket he was required to take a step forward.
There was an understanding among everyone in the room that this was how it was supposed to be.
The script had been written long ago and performed by other men in other rooms and in movies.
Seeing this, the gangster grinned.
He proceeded to feel around inside his jacket, and then he extended his hand.
In place of a gun was a business card.
"My gun I keep down here," he said, raising the cuff of his left trouser leg.
Strapped above his ankle was a pistol in a black padded holster.
"You see, we are civilized businessmen.
Before we reach for that, we reach for this."
He placed the card on Skinny Zyama's desk.
"We manage very respectable artists.
We provide security.
Many good Russian restaurants in New Jersey and Brooklyn are our customers.
There is a phone number on the card.
It is our mobile phone.
Think about what we said and call.
If we don't hear from you, we'll come Saturday night to see for ourselves how successful you are."
After the gangsters left, Skinny Zyama picked up the business card and flicked it into his wastebasket.
He passed his hand along the surface of his desk and examined his fingertips for dust.
"Small-timers.
Nobodies.
Who do they think they're dealing with?"
Kostya waited for a few moments to see if he would say anything else.
Zyama rapped his knuckles on the edge of the desk. He spun the knob of his Rolodex.
He reached into a drawer for a pack of cigarettes.
"Is that it?" Kostya asked.
"That one sits staring like a mummy.
The other one with the gun on his leg.
Think they can intimidate me in my own place.
I shit on them from a tall bridge," Zyama said.
That was Zyama's final word.
He was Zyama Karp, the impresario of the Russian Riviera restaurant.
He was a man of influence. Not someone to be pushed around.
And, after all, he had Kostya, a Siberian boxing champion.
"If they come back on Saturday, you take care of them," Zyama said.
From the Russian Riviera, Kostya drove to the Prima Donna Ballet Academy to return a blouse that Ivetta had forgotten at his apartment.
Ivetta frequently forgot things at his apartment, only to discover that the thing she had forgotten was exactly the thing she could not live without.
Kostya no longer resisted this; he had learned that it was best simply to return the item - a blouse, a pair of earrings, a lipstick - as soon as possible.
He had also learned that once Ivetta resumed possession of these things her need for them diminished.
Ivetta was waiting at the entrance to the ballet school.
She took a moment to confirm that he had brought the blouse, then lifted herself into the van.
"I have five minutes," she said.
"We should drive around the block."
As Kostya eased the van onto the street, Ivetta looked up at her mother's office, on the second floor of the Ballet Academy.
"I think I see her standing there," Ivetta said.
Kostya interpreted this as a signal to drive faster, but when he accelerated Ivetta told him to slow down.
If her mother was watching, Ivetta didn't want to give her the satisfaction of seeing her behave furtively.
Kostya didn't completely understand the rules that governed Ivetta's attitude toward her mother, but he knew that Luda Sorkin disapproved of him.
Luda had been a prima ballerina.
She was a cultured person. She was also a successful businesswoman.
She had schooled her daughter in the fine arts, she had given her a university education, and she was grooming her to take over the business.
That such a woman would want more for her daughter than someone who was a failed boxer, a doorman, and an illegal immigrant seemed to him perfectly reasonable.
In fact, he could understand Luda's logic better than Ivetta's. Why Ivetta should not want to be with him made much more sense than why she should.
When Kostya told her as much recently, she had led him from the bed to their reflection in his mirrored closet door.
"We are beautiful together," she said.
Kostya supposed they looked good.
He still went to the gym five days a week and was conscious of his physique.
And Ivetta had the long, slender muscles of a trained dancer.
At the restaurant and on the street, Kostya was aware that men looked at her.
She was attractive in the usual ways, but Kostya's eyes were always drawn to the intricate places where different parts of her joined: her shoulders, her collarbone, the backs of her knees, her ankles, her hands.
"You could be beautiful together with someone else," Kostya told her.
"Then you don't see what I see," Ivetta said glumly, and she moved away from him and hunched on the edge of the bed.
That he didn't see what Ivetta saw had been precisely the origin of the conversation, and so her answer did nothing to clarify things.
Kostya considered pointing this out but knew that it would only irritate her further.
"You are honest and good," Ivetta had finally declared from her desolation at the edge of the bed.
And now, because he was honest and good, Ivetta wanted to protect him from Luda's sneering condescension.
For this reason, she had asked that he find someone else to work his shift on Saturday night, when her mother was going to make a rare appearance at the Russian Riviera.
"But I am a doorman," Kostya said.
"What do I care how she looks at me?"
"I care," Ivetta said.
Most of her family would be there Saturday night, and she did not want to introduce him to them under those circumstances.
If they were to meet him, it should be done across a table, properly and with respect. Not with her family celebrating her grandfather's birthday while Kostya was relegated to the door or the bar - an employee.
"Did you ask Zyama?" Ivetta said."I will."
Up until that afternoon, Kostya had been prepared to do just that, but now he couldn't imagine how it was possible.
Zyama had expended considerable energy publicizing the fact that he had a Siberian boxing champion working his door - he would have opposed a change at the door on a night without gangsters.
And, even if Zyama could be persuaded, Kostya's conscience would not allow it.
Which meant that, as alternatives went, Kostya had two: he could work or he could quit.
And he preferred to risk the possibility of gangsters against the certainty of unemployment.
To Ivetta, of course, he could confess none of this.
Her reaction would be predictable and extreme.
She would go to Zyama or to the police.
Both of which would mean the end of his job.
Also, she would likely regard the situation as further evidence of their need to run off together and start a new life in another city, far away from her mother.
She had urged him to do this before, to leave his demeaning job at the Russian Riviera, to escape somewhere, get married, go to school, start a business, buy a house, have children, live happily.
The idea was tempting; Kostya had no attachment to Toronto or to the Russian Riviera, but, at thirty-four, he was no longer a boy.
If he quit his job and ran away with Ivetta and she grew tired of him - a man without an education, with few talents, deficient in English - he was afraid that he would find himself back at zero.
He would lose even the few things that he had managed to accomplish.
At fourteen, in the gymnasium of the No. 4 High School, Kostya and his classmates, stripped to their underpants, had submitted to a series of physical tests administered by the head boxing trainer of the Omsk Spartak Athletics Club.
The man had measured the length of their arms; checked with calipers the thickness of the skin below their eyebrows; had them execute the standing broad jump and a complex version of hopscotch.
Then, to eliminate criers and bleeders, he had punched each boy in the nose.
From a class of twenty boys, he had selected three.
Kostya was one of them.
This was in 1975, one year before the Montreal Olympics.
The trainer, widely known to be the son of an enemy of the people, had invited himself to Kostya's apartment to meet with his parents.
In the communal kitchen, Kostya's mother served tea and condensed milk.
The meeting was very formal, as though important business were being transacted.