The Weir
He pops the catch and lifts the rusty boot.
Quivering with excitement, the dogs burst from the back of the car, squirm under the lowest bar of the fence, and bolt across the field in great arcing bounds.
Leo and Fran, big chocolate-and-white pointers.
He drops the chewed and ragged tennis ball into one jacket pocket, the coiled leather leads into the other, grabs the old gripless tennis racket, and slams the boot.
He beeps the lock and climbs the stile.
Grass stretches into the distance.
Twenty acres. There are no sheep this year, so half a million buttercups hover just above the ground.
He can smell the May blossom, the same chemicals that are in semen and corpses, so he read the other day.
Wytham Woods rise beyond the meadow to his left.
Up there among the trees is the path called the Singing Way, where pilgrims broke into song as they passed My Lady¡¯s Seat and looked across the silver flood of Port Meadow to the inns and spires of Oxford.
It¡¯s one of those spring days which seem warm and cold at the same time. Cirrus clouds overhead. Ice crystals at sixteen thousand feet.
Enough blue to make a pair of sailor¡¯s trousers.
A pied wagtail lands briefly on the path in front of him, then hops back into the air and is carried away.
Leo races toward him and skids to a halt with Fran in pursuit.
He barks and half prostrates himself, forelegs flat on the ground, hindquarters in the air.
Throw the ball throw the ball throw the ball.
Ian lobs it into the air, whacks it hard, and both dogs launch themselves backward, twisting in midair so that they land on all fours, then run like racehorses in old paintings, the ball still up there, sliding around that big curve.
To his right, the river is full from last week¡¯s downpour, the surface purling midstream as the water sorts itself out below the weir.
A buzzard circles above the scrubby wasteland on the far side.
He treads carefully over the loose twisty poles of the cattle grid and feels, as he always does at this precise point, that he has crossed an invisible boundary that marks the limit of the town¡¯s reach.
It¡¯s now seven weeks since Maria left, and he¡¯s rather pleased at how well he¡¯s coping.
The dogs help, dragging him out on long walks like this.
Having the time of their lives, probably.
Plus, thanks to them, the house is never empty.
He¡¯s learning to cook for himself after twenty-six years: macaroni and cheese, shepherd¡¯s pie. . . .
And reading his way through the stacks of books that have been glaring at him from the shelf above the TV for the last God knows how long: John Grisham, Philip Pullman, the one set in Afghanistan whose author he can never remember.
Fran returns with the ball in her mouth.
They do a little dance of dodge-and-feint.
She drops it.
He picks it up and whacks it away again.
If there are rough patches, that¡¯s to be expected.
Change gets harder as you get older, just as the body becomes less flexible.
Today, for example.
The nagging feeling he has that his marriage is only the latest thing to have slipped away.
The world is shifting too fast, in ways he doesn¡¯t understand, and values he grew up with have become vaguely comic: courtesy, respect, stoicism, reticence.
When did holding a door open for a woman become an insult? Teen-agers watching pornography on their phones.
He wonders if it all comes down to Timothy, the friction that ended the marriage.
Or whether, when you have a ready-made answer like that, you use it lazily for every question.
The fact that their son¡¯s behavior may be malicious is what makes it hardest to handle, Timothy wanting them to suffer.
Three years without a postcard, an e-mail, a phone call.
How angry he felt when Maria said that it would be better if Timothy were dead.
Her own child.
He has dreams of a blurred postmark.
Lhasa? Marrakesh? Stepping off the plane into sauna shimmer.
Hostels, caf¨¦s, some unshaven local policeman with his feet on the desk under an idle ceiling fan.
The photograph in his pocket getting more dog-eared and faded by the day.
Fran returns yet again with the tennis ball. Leo is busy chasing something.
So long as he doesn¡¯t bring it back bloody and struggling.
Ian hits the ball high into the air with a satisfying boink of the taut strings.
She isn¡¯t with someone else, thank God.
Unless she¡¯s hiding it.
Which wouldn¡¯t be hard, him being blind to so many things.
There is movement at the edge of his field of vision now.
Someone is walking along the gantry of the weir that runs between the farmland and the island.
The lockkeeper, presumably, or an inspector from the Environment Agency.
But then the person turns, and he sees a bright-red rucksack.
It¡¯s a woman.
She must have lost her way.
As far as he knows, you can reach the weir only via an unmarked track that descends from the hard shoulder of the ring road.
Black leggings, denim skirt, big tartan shirt, long straight blond hair.
Twenty, maybe twenty-five.
She seems unsure of her footing and is supporting herself by holding onto the metal uprights and the rusted valves.
It is not a good place to be unsteady on your feet.
Again Fran blocks the path in front of him, tail up, head down, panting, tennis ball between her paws.
Not now.
She whimpers. Please please.
He picks it up, wallops it away, and starts walking upriver toward the lock.
Beneath the woman¡¯s feet, the whole river is being forced through a single open gate, a fat silver spout curving into the churn of surf.
The roar could be a house on fire.
She comes to a halt at the very center of the weir.
She is clearly in some kind of trouble.
Sudden dizziness, maybe, or that phobia people get on bridges.
He can imagine standing there and looking down and being spooked by that torrent.
He wants to call out to her, reassure her that he will be with her in a few minutes, but there is no way she will hear him at this distance and over that noise.
He starts to run.
If he remembers correctly, there is only a chain to keep pedestrians from crossing the lock.
Presumably there is some kind of path through the trees.
It will take him, what, two or three minutes?
Then he sees her let go of the supports.
She is facing downriver and he realizes that she is planning to jump.
Understands, too, why she was staggering, because why else would you wear a rucksack if you were planning to do something like that? He feels sick at the thought.
¡°No!¡± He waves his arms, but she does not turn her head.
She pitches gently forward.
It is both more and less real than anything he has ever seen.
Time really does slow down.
Her blond hair rises like a candle flame.
She seems completely relaxed, more like someone sleeping than like someone falling.
She vanishes into the foam.
Everything is suddenly back to normal.
The dandelions, the clouds, the buzzard.
For a few seconds he wonders if he really saw it.
But Leo is standing on the bank beside him, barking at the water, and he understands that the woman is dying right now, somewhere out there, trapped in the stopper, perhaps, being tumbled and battered in that big drum of water.
He takes his phone out of his trouser pocket but his hands are trembling too much to dial a number.
Then he sees it in the water, the briefest flash of red.
His jacket and his shoes are off.
He does not remember doing this.
Red again midstream.
Both dogs at the bank now, barking.
He jumps into the shallows.
This is a stupid thing to do.
Weed and sucking mud.
He throws himself forward in a clumsy half dive.
The silty bottom reluctantly lets him go.
The water is so cold his chest seizes and he cannot breathe.
He gathers his energy and shouts the way he would shout if he were lifting a heavy weight.
His ribs loosen.
It is nothing like the sea; it is nothing like a pool.
The water sweeps him sideways.
He can no longer touch the bottom with his feet.
He realizes how big the river is now that he is inside it, how strong, how lost the woman must be, and how slim his chances are of finding her.
He ducks under the surface, but the water is the cloudy green of Victorian bottle glass and he can see for a couple of feet at most.
He lifts his head out of the water and sees how swiftly he is being carried downriver.
The banks are hidden now behind half-submerged bushes and trapped flotsam, the flow narrowing and picking up speed to squeeze under the bridge.
Below the bridge is the weir stream for the next lock.
He is suddenly very alone and very frightened, an idiot who has jumped into a swollen river.
His sodden clothes are shockingly heavy, and it is becoming increasingly hard to keep his head above water.
She looms out of the bubbling green and claws at his face.
Mostly he is angry that she has attacked him when he is risking his life to save her.
Memories of lifesaving classes at school, Mr. Schiller with his speech impediment, pajama bottoms knotted at the ankles.
He yanks her around so she¡¯s facing away from him. Cup a hand under the chin, that was it. Her arms and legs are pedalling hard, trying to make a ladder of the water.
Silver bubbles pour from her nose and mouth.
He can¡¯t keep her mouth above the surface.
The rucksack. Christ. He¡¯d forgotten.
He doesn¡¯t have the strength but the idea of not doing it is unbearable.
He gulps as much air as he can, then ducks under.
They sink together, the big red ballast pulling them down.
He turns her around and grabs at the belt. Which sort of buckle is it?
Sudden darkness overhead. The bridge. They¡¯re moving fast. He needs a knife. He doesn¡¯t have a knife.
Yank, squeeze, twist.
She is punching him and grabbing his hair but whether she is trying to get to the surface or keep him from undoing the rucksack he cannot tell.
His lungs are crying out for air. Don¡¯t breathe. A vicious scrabbling panic.
His thoughts are becoming blurred, his brain starting to shut down.
Some fierce animal hunger for life wipes the woman from his mind.
He kicks upward¡ªhang on, hang on¡ªand bursts into sunlight.
He heaves down a lungful of air and dirty water, chokes and coughs it out, then sucks down another lungful. Then a third.
She is down there somewhere, dying, dead.
He can hear the dogs barking nearby.
She surfaces suddenly beside him, head above the water now.
No rucksack.
He must have got it off. Her eyes are closed. She¡¯s not moving.
He grabs her hair this time.
No time for niceties.
She doesn¡¯t respond. Maybe he is dragging a corpse.
He swims with one arm, breaststroke legs.
Way past the bridge now.
A hundred metres until the weir stream peels off and drags them sideways.
He swims hard in the other direction, grabbing the end of a thorny branch. It snaps. He grabs another and it holds.
They swing toward the bank and slow down as they are pulled out of the main current.
The bottom. He can feel it, thank God. Sludge and roots.
He heaves her shoulders upright so she¡¯s sitting in the shallow water.
A reedy foot of bank between two brambles.