Cold Little Bird
It started with bedtime.
A coldness.
A formality.
Martin and Rachel tucked the boy in, as was their habit, then stooped to kiss him good night.
"Please don't do that," he said, turning to face the wall.
They took it as teasing, flopped onto his bed to nuzzle and tickle him.
The boy turned rigid, endured the cuddle, then barked out at them, "I really don't like that!"
"Jonah?" Martin said, sitting up.
"I don't want your help at bedtime anymore," he said.
"I'm not a baby.
You have Lester. Go cuddle with him."
"Sweetheart," Rachel said.
"We're not helping you.
We're just saying good night.
You like kisses, right? Don't you like kisses and cuddles? You big silly."
Jonah hid under the blankets.
A classic pout.
Except that he wasn't a pouter, he wasn't a hider.
He was a reserved boy who generally took a scientific interest in the tantrums and emotional extravagances of other children, marvelling at them as though they were some strange form of street theatre.
Martin tried to tickle the blanketed lump of person that was his son.
He didn't know what part of Jonah he was touching. He just dug at him with a stiff hand, thinking a laugh would come out, some sound of pleasure.
It used to work. One stab of the finger and the kid exploded with giggles.
But Jonah didn't speak, didn't move.
"We love you so much.
You know?" Martin said.
"So we like to show it.
It feels good."
"Not to me. I don't feel that way."
"What way? What do you mean?"
They sat with him, perplexed, and tried to rub his back, but he'd rolled to the edge of the bed, nearly flattening himself against the wall.
"I don't love you," Jonah said.
"Oh, now," Martin said. "You're just tired.
No need to say that sort of stuff. Get some rest."
"You told me to tell the truth, and I'm telling the truth.
I. Don't. Love. You."
This happened.
Kids tested their attachments.
They tried to push you away to see just how much it would take to really lose you.
As a parent, you took the blow, even sharpened the knife yourself before handing it to the little fiends, who stepped right up and plunged.
Or so Martin had heard.
They hovered by Jonah's bed, assuring him that it had been a long day - although the day had been entirely unremarkable - and he would feel better in the morning.
Martin felt like a robot saying these things.
He felt like a robot thinking them.
There was nothing to do but leave the boy there, let him sleep it off.
Downstairs, they cleaned the kitchen in silence.
Rachel was troubled or not, he couldn't tell, and it was better not to check.
In some way, Martin was captivated.
If he were Jonah, ten years old and reasonably smart, starting to sniff out the world and find his angle, this might be something worth exploring.
Getting rid of the soft, warm, dumb providers who spun opportunity around you relentlessly, answering your every need.
Good play, Jonah.
But how do you follow such a strong, definitive opening move?
What now?
Over the next few weeks, Jonah stuck by his statement, wandering through their lives like some prisoner of war who'd been trained not to talk.
He endured his parents, leaving for school in the morning with scarcely a goodbye.
Upon coming home, he put away his coat and shoes, did his homework without prompting.
He helped himself to snacks, dragging a chair into the kitchen so that he could climb on the counter.
He got his own glass, filling it with water at the sink.
When he was done eating, he loaded his dishes in the dishwasher.
Martin, working from home in the afternoons, watched all this, impressed but bothered.
He kept offering to help, but Jonah always said that he was fine, he could handle it.
At bedtime, Martin and Rachel still fussed over Lester, who, at six years old, regressed and babified himself in order to drink up the extra attention.
Jonah insisted on saying good night with no kiss, no hug.
He shut his door and disappeared every night at 8 P.M.
When Martin or Rachel caught Jonah's eye, the boy forced a smile at them.
But it was so obviously fake.
Could a boy his age do that?
"Of course," Rachel said.
"You think he doesn't know how to pretend?" "No, I know he can pretend.
But this seems different.
I mean, to have to pretend that he's happy to see us.
First of all, what the fuck is he so upset about? And, second, it just seems so kind of . . . grownup.
In the worst possible way.
A fake smile. It's a tool one uses with strangers."
"Well, I don't know.
He's ten. He has social skills.
He can hide his feelings. That's not such an advanced thing to do."
Martin studied his wife.
"O.K., so you think everything's fine?"
"I think maybe he's growing up and you don't like it."
"And you like it? That's what you're saying? You like this?"
His voice had gone up.
He had lost control for a minute there, and, as per motherfucking usual, it was a deal-breaker.
Rachel put up her hand, and she was gone.
From the other room, he heard her say, "I'm not going to talk to you when you're like this."
O.K., he thought.
Goodbye.
We'll talk some other time when I'm not like this, a.k.a. never.
Jonah, it turned out, reserved this behavior solely for his parents.
A probing note to his teacher revealed nothing.
He was fine in school, did not act withdrawn, had successfully led a team project on Antarctica, and seemed to run and play with his friends during recess.
Run and play?
What animal were they discussing here? Everybody loved Jonah was the verdict, along with some bullshit about how happy he seemed.
"Seemed" was just the thing.
Seemed! If you were an idiot who didn't know the boy, who had no grasp of human behavior.
At home, Jonah doted on his brother, read to him, played with him, even let Lester climb on his back for rides around the house, all fairly verboten in the old days, when Jonah's interest in Lester had only ever been theoretical.
Lester was thrilled by it all.
He suddenly had a new friend, the older brother he worshipped, who used to ignore him.
Life was good.
But to Martin it felt like a calculated display.
With this performance of tenderness toward his brother, Jonah seemed to be saying, "Look, this is what you no longer get.
See? It's over for you. Go fuck yourself."
Martin took it too personally, he knew.
Maybe because it was personal.
One night, when Jonah hadn't touched his dinner, they were asking him if he would like something else to eat, and, because he wasn't answering, and really had not been answering for some weeks now, other than in one-word responses, curt and formal.
Martin and Rachel abandoned their usual rules, the guideposts of parenting they'd clung to, and moved through a list of bribes. They dangled the promise of ice cream, and then those monstrosities passing for Popsicles, shaped like animals with chocolate faces or hats, which used to turn Jonah craven and desperate.
When Jonah remained silent and sort of washed-out looking, Martin offered his son candy. He could have some right now.
If only he'd fucking say something.
"It's just that you're all in his face," Rachel said to him later.
"How's he supposed to breathe?"
"You think my desire for him to speak is making him silent?"
"It's probably not helping."
"Whereas your approach is so amazing."
"My approach? You mean being his mother? Loving him for who he is? Keeping him safe? Yeah, it is pretty amazing."
He turned over to sleep while Rachel clipped on her book light.
They'd ride this one out in silence, apparently.
They'd written their own vows, promising to be "intensely honest" with each other.
They had not specifically said that they would hold up each other's flaws to the most rigorous scrutiny, calling out each other's smallest mistakes, like fact checkers, believing, perhaps, that the marriage would thrive only if all personal errors and misdeeds were rooted out of it.
This mission had gone unstated.
In the morning, when Martin got up, Jonah sat reading while Lester played soldiers on the rug.
Lester was fully dressed, his backpack near the door.
There was no possible way that Lester had done this on his own.
Obviously, Jonah had dressed his brother, emptied the boy's backpack of yesterday's crap art from the first-grade praise farm he attended, and readied it for a new day.
Months ago, they'd asked Jonah to perform this role in the morning, to dress and prepare his brother, so that they could sleep in, and Jonah had complied a few times, but halfheartedly, with a certain mysterious cost to little Lester, who was often speechless and tear-streaked by the time they found him.
The chore had quickly lapsed, and usually Martin awoke to a hungry, half-naked Lester, waiting for his help.
Today, Lester seemed happy.
There was no sign of crying.
"Good morning, Daddy," he said.
"Hello there, Les, my friend.
Sleep O.K.?"
"Jonah made me breakfast.
I had juice and Cheerios.
I brought in my own dishes."
"Way to go! Thank you."
Martin figured he'd just play it casual, not draw too much attention to anything.
"Good morning, champ," he said to Jonah.
"What are you reading?"
Martin braced himself for silence, for stillness, for a child who hadn't heard or who didn't want to answer. But Jonah looked at him.
"It's a book called 'The Short.'
It's a novel," he said, and then he resumed reading.
A fat bolt of lightning filled the cover.
A boy ran beneath it.
The title lettering was achieved graphically with one long wire, a plug trailing off the cover.
"Oh, yeah?" Martin said.
"What's it about? Tell me about it."
There was a long pause this time.
Martin went into the kitchen to get his coffee started. He popped back out to the living room and snapped his fingers.
"Jonah, hello. Your book.
What's it about?"
Jonah spoke quietly.
His little flannel shirt was buttoned up to the collar, as if he were headed out into a blizzard.
Martin almost heard a kind of apology in his voice.
"Since I have to leave for school in fifteen minutes, and since I was hoping to get to page 100 this morning, would it be O.K. if I didn't describe it to you? You can look it up on Amazon."
He told Rachel about this later in the morning, the boy's unsettling calm, his odd response.
"Yeah, I don't know," she said.
"I mean, good for him, right? He just wanted to read, and he told you that. So what?"
"Huh," Martin said.
Rachel was busy cleaning.
She hadn't looked at him.
Their argument last night had either been forgotten or stored for later activation.
He'd find out.
She seemed engrossed by a panicked effort at tidying, as if guests were arriving any second, as if their house were going to be inspected by the fucking U.N. Martin followed her around while they talked, because if he didn't she'd roam out of earshot and the conversation would expire.
"He just seems like a stranger to me," Martin said, trying to add a lightness to his voice so she wouldn't hear it as a complaint.