The Apartment
uise knew by the new name on the call box that someone had moved in. She'd seen lights and movement in the apartment, which was across the courtyard from her and Martin, for the past few days.
The new name confirmed it. Someone had finally bought the place.
The name had been typed on a small piece of green paper and taped to the call box beside the apartment's number.
Louise had once known a man with the name Jahani.
Arman had been a doctoral student in French the year she started at Stockholm University.
He'd taught the conversation tutorial she took fall term.
She looked at the green paper again.
All that was so long ago.
He was the second man she'd slept with. Martin still didn't know about it.
She checked her watch.
She was on her way out to meet her son, Jonas, for lunch.
The metro she wanted to take was due in ten minutes.
Arman had come from Iran to study, or maybe he'd come to escape the revolution. She couldn't recall the details now.
The years merged into one another.
A bus rushed past on the street, and the blast of hot air stung her neck.
Jonas wanted to try a sushi restaurant he'd heard about.
They took a table on the patio.
It was September but very warm out.
She let him order.
Arman had died in the early nineties. He was a professor of French at the university by then, and his death had been noted briefly in the culture section of DN.
One of his books about French cognates had caused a minor controversy.
His obituary had mentioned two children, she believed, a daughter and a son. Maybe one of them had moved into her building.
"News from home," she said after the waitress had brought their drinks - water for Jonas, white wine for Louise.
Jonas hadn't lived with Louise and Martin for more than a decade, but she still thought of the apartment as his home.
"The apartment across the courtyard finally sold."
"The neighbor who died?" he said. "Dad mentioned it."
Martin served on the co-op board and would have known about the sale.
He rarely shared such information with Louise.
"That's right," she said.
"Barbro Ekman.
Her children had been trying to sell the place for months.
You can't imagine the smell when the body was first discovered."
The apartment, which was one floor lower than her and Martin's, had been empty since Barbro Ekman died, shortly before Christmas the previous year.
Her body was found only after Martin, who'd gone up to the attic storage area on that side of the building to retrieve a box of decorations, smelled the decomposition. The air was sour and rotten, even two floors up.
He'd been upset that no one in the building had noticed for so long, that no one who lived closer to Barbro Ekman had been alarmed by the overwhelming stench.
"They're all so selfish," he'd said.
But Louise suspected he was really only upset that he'd been the one to make the discovery.
Jonas took a drink of his water. "Gruesome," he said.
It had been snowing the day the cleaning company came.
She'd watched from her kitchen as they worked.
They scrubbed walls and floors, removed furniture. They even took some of the fixtures and appliances from the kitchen.
The idea that humans are so unclean on the inside had preoccupied Louise for weeks.
"Well," she told her son, "I can't imagine what a relief it must be to her family."
"I don't think I ever met that woman," Jonas said.
"Not that I remember."
"She was very old," Louise said.
She didn't know if he was telling the truth or saying this only to annoy her.
From the bedroom on the courtyard side of their apartment there was a clear view of Barbro Ekman's living room.
When Jonas was young, that bedroom had been his.
Now Martin used it as an office.
She rarely went into the room anymore.
Martin was private about so much.
"Do you remember the blue light from her window?" she asked Jonas. "How it used to reflect on the flower box?"
"I think so," he said.
"It used to scare you."
He tore open the paper wrapping of the chopsticks, pulled them apart, and rubbed them together to smooth the edges.
"It was so easy to explain," she said.
"It was just her television, I always told you. But you never believed me."
The waitress arrived with two rectangular plates and set them down in the center of the table.
Colorful pieces of fish were arranged on each plate.
Louise had tried to listen to what Jonas had ordered for them both and to follow along by looking at the pictures in her own menu, but now that the food had arrived she couldn't tell one piece of fish from another.
Jonas pointed with his chopsticks. "Salmon," he said. "And yellowtail. Whitefish. Eel on this plate here."
She'd always disliked eel.
Eels could travel great distances out of the water, and she found this disturbing.
"Who bought the apartment?" Jonas asked.
"I only know a name," Louise said.
Arman had been a good teacher.
She could still conjugate several French verbs, hear him reading from lists he'd written on the chalkboard: present indicative, present conditional, present subjunctive.
She remembered the strangest things.
There couldn't be that many Jahanis in Stockholm.
Jonas was thirty-four. Would she feel jealous or relieved if the person in the apartment was close to that age?
She watched her son eat.
He talked about a problem at his office. An e-mail had accidentally been sent to the wrong person, and Jonas found this uncomfortably funny.
He'd been in his current position for only a year, and everything he said about his job, positive or negative, surged with fresh excitement.
When they finished, Jonas insisted on paying the check. As he was figuring out the tip, she typed an e-mail on her phone reminding herself to deposit money into his account.
She walked him back to work. They said goodbye to each other outside the building's glass-walled entryway.
Jonas vanished into the crowd of office workers.
It was remarkable how similar to her son they all looked.
It had been the same when he was in school.
The children were all identical.
Hundreds of them crowded the spaces of his childhood.
His soccer matches, ski lessons, piano classes.
She'd always been at ease with the idea of being the mother of a child who was like everyone else. It was a relief to exist so close to the middle.
There were so many fewer risks.
She watched the crowd fill the lobby.
They could all be my children, she thought.
She decided to walk home.
Systembolaget had a branch near Jonas's office, and she wanted to buy a bottle of wine.
It embarrassed her to buy wine more than twice a week from the same Systembolaget, and she'd been to the location closer to her apartment just the day before.
Lately, she'd been interested in South African wines.
She picked two bottles of a Cabernet that, according to a sign fastened to the shelf in the store, had ranked very highly in a blind taste test.
She paid for the wine, and, as she left the store, she looked up and down the street to see if there was anyone who might recognize her.
Then she stuffed the bottles into her purse, concealing what wouldn't fit all the way in with her scarf, and walked the rest of the way home.
The green piece of paper was still there on the call box, partly obscuring the name Ekman.
One corner of the paper curled outward in the heat.
With her fingernail, she started to peel the tape off so that she could reposition it over the paper, but she stopped herself.
She set her purse on the kitchen counter.
The bottles clinked.
It was two, according to the oven clock.
Martin was at work.
That evening he was going out with colleagues to celebrate his retirement.
They were taking him to a karaoke bar.
She didn't expect him to be home until late.
Martin was retiring early. They didn't need the money, and he was bored with work.
She opened one of the bottles of wine and poured herself a glass.
Sometimes she worried that she was damaging her health.
The music was still playing, and it seeped clearly into the kitchen from the open window.
She took her wine to the balcony and sat looking out over the courtyard.
The curtains in Barbro Ekman's apartment were drawn, and the apartment was dark.
She could hear the music from the ground floor. A new song came on, one she recognized.
She mouthed along to a few words of the chorus, took a sip of her wine.
The wine tasted good, and the song reminded her of somewhere nice.
She couldn't place the memory exactly, but it made her think of the outdoors, of a beautiful view.
There were trees and snow.
Maybe the song had played on the radio frequently during a trip they'd once taken.
In the apartment just below Barbro Ekman's place lived a woman named Johanna. Her two sons were grown now.
One of them played ice hockey in America, somewhere in the Southern states, Louise thought - North Carolina, maybe.
The other was a lawyer up north, in Kiruna.
Louise remembered when the family had moved in. The boys were so young. That was right before Louise had become pregnant with Jonas.
She'd liked the family. She'd helped the boys plant a small herb garden on her balcony, because it faced east and got good morning sun.
Once, about a month before Jonas was born, Johanna had asked Louise to babysit the older of her sons.
The younger one was very sick, and Johanna hadn't wanted to take them both to the hospital.
Louise wasn't feeling well herself and didn't want to catch whatever the boy had. So she volunteered Martin to go in her place.
After barely an hour, he came back.
She heard his footsteps in the hall outside their apartment. She heard the front door open and Martin's heavy tread as he walked to the bedroom.
He was tired, he told her, and had forgotten to take a book to read.
"Who's watching him?" she asked. "Has Johanna come home?"
The bed was warm and comfortable, and, silhouetted in the doorway, Martin appeared much larger than he actually was.
"I need to find my book," he said.
"They have books there," she said. "And a television."
"I'm tired, Louise," he said.
Then the shadow of her husband stepped out of the doorway and disappeared into the hall.
She heard a door open and close, then the airy creak of leather as he settled into his chair in the living room.
She got out of bed and wrapped herself in her robe.
It was the first time she could remember hating her husband.
Over the years that had become such a familiar, even comforting, feeling.
It was cold out, and she crossed the courtyard as quickly as she could, taking care to avoid an icy patch where the shadow from a first-floor balcony kept the ground wet even in the warmest part of the day.
She could remember so much about that evening, but not what the problem with the younger boy had been.
She couldn't recall Johanna's coming home. But she distinctly remembered waking up on Johanna's couch, her throat and stomach on fire with heartburn and hatred for Martin.
The next time she saw Johanna, she thought she'd ask her about that night.