Second Lives
Many parents, with admirable foresight, had their first child while they were on fellowships in the United States.
My mother was in public health, and my father in a library-science program.
Having an American baby was, my mother once said, like putting money in the bank.
They lived near downtown Baltimore, by the hospital where my mother was studying, in a neighborhood of dilapidated row houses.
Baltimore was abject, ugly, my mother said.
Cold in winter, a sauna in summer, a violently segregated city, full of fearful whites and angry blacks.
America, in those days, had all its dirty laundry available for inspection- the world's most powerful nation making war with itself in the streets, in universities, in the South, in Vietnam, in the capital just down the road.
And yet my parents set about trying to make babies: on spring nights, when they made the room smell of earth, summer nights, when the city felt like a swamp, autumn nights, falling asleep on top of the covers, winter nights, when the room boiled with sex.
They were not newlyweds, strictly speaking, but Baltimore reenergized them, made of their pairing something indispensable, something chemical.
For their efforts, they were rewarded with a son, whom they named Francisco.
The district they lived in was one of the poorest in the country at the time, and once the birth was registered my parents were entitled to free baby formula, delivered to their doorstep every Monday morning.
They found this astonishing, and later learned that many of the foreign doctors at the hospital were receiving this benefit, too, even a few who didn't yet have children.
It was a gigantic bribe, my father said, the government pleading with its poverty-stricken residents: Please, please don't riot!
Baltimore was adorned with reminders of the last civil disturbance: a burned-out block of storefronts, a boarded-up and untended house whose roof had collapsed after a snowstorm.
Every morning, the sidewalks were littered with shattered car windows, tiny bits of glass glinting like diamonds in the limpid sun.
No one used money in the neighborhood stores, only coupons; and, in lieu of birds, the skies featured plastic bags held aloft on a breeze.
But none of this mattered, because my parents were happy.
They were in love and they had a beautiful boy, his photo affixed to a blue First World passport.
Their American moment didn't last long.
They would have had another child- they would have had me- if their visas hadn't run out.
By the time my mother was done nursing Francisco, a coup had taken place back home, and the military junta that came to power was not entirely friendly with the Johnson Administration.
My parents were required to renew their papers every eighteen months, and that year, to their great surprise, they were denied.
Appeals, they were told, could be filed only from the home country.
The university hospital wrote a letter on my mother's behalf, but this well-meaning document vanished into some bureaucrat's file cabinet in suburban Virginia, and it soon became clear that there was nothing to be done.
Rather than be deported- how undignified!- my parents left of their own accord.
And then their gaze turned, back to their families, their friends, the places they had known, and those they had forgotten they knew.
They bought a house in a suburb of the capital, where I was raised, an out-of-the-way place that has since been swallowed entirely by the city's growth.
I guess they lost that old Baltimore feeling, because I wasn't born for another seven years, a crying, red-faced bit of flesh, a runt, undersized even then.
No blue passport for me, but they consoled themselves by giving me an Anglo name, Nelson, which was the fashion at the time.
Eventually, I got my Third World passport, the color of spilled red wine, but it was just for show.
I still haven't had a chance to use it.
Francisco, of course, fled at the first opportunity.
It was January, 1987, the situation was bleak, and leaving was the most logical thing to do.
I was ten years old; the idea was that he'd get me a visa and I'd join him as soon as I finished school.
We went as a family to see him off at the airport, took the obligatory photographs in front of the departures board, and waved as he passed through security.
He promised to write. He promised to call.
He disappeared into the terminal, and then we climbed the stairs to the greasy restaurant above the baggage claim, where we sat by the wall of windows, waiting for a plane that looked like it might be my brother's to take off.
My father drank coffee, fogged his glasses with his breath and polished the lenses between the folds of his dress shirt.
My mother drew a palm tree on a paper napkin, frowning.
I fell asleep with my head on the table, and when I woke up the janitor was mopping the floor beside us, wondering, perhaps, if we ever intended to leave.
My brother went to live with the Villanuevas, old friends of my parents from their Baltimore days, who'd settled in Birmingham, Alabama.
His first letter was three handwritten pages and began with a description of winter in the Southern United States.
That year, the Alabama rains fell almost without pause until the middle of March, a soggy prelude to an even wetter spring. For Francisco, unaccustomed to this weather, the thunderstorms were impressive.
Occasionally, there'd be a downed power line, and sometimes the lights would go out as a result.
It was in this familiar darkness, Francisco wrote, that he'd first felt homesick.
The second half of the letter dealt more specifically with the routines of family life at the Villanuevas.
Where they lived wasn't a neighborhood so much as a collection of houses that happened to face the same street. Kids were permitted to play in the back yard or in the driveway, but never in the front yard.
No one could explain why, but it simply wasn't done.
People moved about only in cars; walking was frowned upon, socially acceptable for children, perhaps, if they happened to be accompanied by a dog.
The Villanuevas did not have pets. Nor was there anywhere to walk to, really. A two-pump gas station sat about a mile away on Highway 31; its attractions included a pay phone and a magazine rack.
The Villanueva children, Marisa and Jack, ages fifteen and ten, respectively, made it clear from the outset that they spoke no Spanish.
The language didn't interest them much, and their father, who insisted that my brother call him Julio and not Mr. Villanueva, considered this his greatest failing as a parent.
It was his fault, he confessed to Francisco, for marrying an American woman. In general terms, though, things were good.
Speaking English with the Villanueva kids, while challenging at first, helped my brother learn the language faster.
At school, not a soul spoke Spanish, not even Se?ora Rickerts, the friendly, well-intentioned Spanish teacher.
Francisco was not enrolled with Marisa, as had originally been planned. She went to an expensive private school, which would not permit Francisco to audit classes, so instead the Villanuevas sent him to Berry, the local public high school, with the hicks.
This last word, Francisco explained, was the rough English equivalent of campesino or cholo, only it referred to rural white people.
He'd learned it from Marisa, and had been advised by Mr. Villanueva never to use it if he wished to make friends.
My father found this part of the letter very amusing. How remarkable, he said, that Villanueva's daughter spoke no Spanish but had somehow imported her father's classism to North America!
How ironic, my father noted, that his own son should learn proletarian solidarity in the belly of the empire!
My parents read and reread the letter at the dinner table, alternately laughing and falling into worried silence.
In the early months, I recall them wondering aloud if they'd made a mistake by sending him away like this. Whose idea had it been?
And where was Birmingham, anyway? Was it a city or a town? What kind of school was this place called Berry?
They wrote back, urging Francisco to send photos.
A month passed, and the next letter arrived with a single picture.
We saw Francisco with an umbrella and a yellow raincoat, standing next to the mailbox in front of the Villanuevas' house, a dense knot of purple clouds above.
The front yard sloped dramatically, and Francisco stood at an odd slant.
He'd put on a little weight- you could see it in his cheeks- and his hair had grown out.
His face was changing, my mother said.
He was growing up.
By his third letter, the winter rains had become spring rains, which were the same, only warmer.
Storms spread like inkblots across the sky. On sunny days after a rain, the woods behind the Villanuevas' subdivision looked as if they'd been dipped in light.
Everyone said that it was an unusually wet year.
Francisco didn't mind- he was fascinated by the weather. It was everything else that bored him.
His great disappointment that spring was that he'd tried out for the Berry High soccer team, and spent three games on the bench, watching the action unfold without him.
He'd quit in protest, and, to his surprise, no one had begged him to come back. They hadn't even noticed.
Americans, he wrote, have no understanding of the game.
The issue was not mentioned again.
By the fourth letter, the weather had turned; breezy, pleasant stretches were punctuated now and then by days of blasting heat.
School would be over soon.
He no longer complained about Berry or his classmates, whose dialect he could barely understand.
Instead, he seemed to have settled in. Each week, Francisco went to the Spanish class and led conversation exercises with his American peers, and several of them had sought him out for further instruction.
An exchange student from Mexico City had spent time at Berry the previous year, seducing Alabama girls and confounding deeply held stereotypes- he didn't wear a poncho, for instance, and was apparently sincere in his love of punk music.
He'd also left behind a folkloric legacy of curse words: panocha, no manches, and pinche guey. Francisco wrote that he considered it his responsibility to teach these poor gringos to curse with dignity, and this was, as far as he could tell, the only linguistic knowledge they truly thirsted for.
He introduced them to important words, words like mierda, culo, and pendejo, while offering the more advanced students a primer on the nearly infinite uses of huevo (huevon, hasta las huevas, hueveo, huevear, se hueveo la huevada).
My parents were proud: "Our son the educator," they said. Photos included with this letter were of nearby Lake Logan Martin, where the Villanuevas had a weekend house.
Sun glinting off the water, bathing suits hanging on a line, barefoot games of Frisbee in the freshly mowed grass.
In summer, Francisco might learn to water-ski.
This was the first letter in which he forgot to ask us how we were.
That year- the only year he consistently wrote to us- the photos were mostly of Francisco by himself.
Occasionally, he'd pose with the Villanuevas: Julio, his wife, Heather, and their two dark-haired, olive-skinned children, who really looked as though they should speak some Spanish.
Once, Francisco sent a photo of the Berry High gymnasium, which was notable only for its size.
The entire high school, he wrote, would soon be razed and replaced by an even bigger complex farther out in the suburbs.
Everyone was excited about this, but he wouldn't be around to see it.