The Embassy of Cambodia
Who would expect the Embassy of Cambodia? Nobody. Nobody could have expected it, or be expecting it.
It's a surprise, to us all. The Embassy of Cambodia!
Next door to the embassy is a health center.
On the other side, a row of private residences, most of them belonging to wealthy Arabs (or so we, the people of Willesden, contend).
They have Corinthian pillars on either side of their front doors, and- it's widely believed- swimming pools out back.
The embassy, by contrast, is not very grand.
It is only a four- or five-bedroom North London suburban villa, built at some point in the thirties, surrounded by a red brick wall, about eight feet high.
And back and forth, cresting this wall horizontally, flies a shuttlecock.
They are playing badminton in the Embassy of Cambodia.
Pock, smash. Pock, smash.
The only real sign that the embassy is an embassy at all is the little brass plaque on the door (which reads, "THE EMBASSY OF CAMBODIA") and the national flag of Cambodia (we assume that's what it is- what else could it be?) flying from the red tiled roof.
Some say, "Oh, but it has a high wall around it, and this is what signifies that it is not a private residence, like the other houses on the street but, rather, an embassy."
The people who say so are foolish. Many of the private houses have high walls, quite as high as the Embassy of Cambodia's- but they are not embassies.
On the sixth of August, Fatou walked past the embassy for the first time, on her way to a swimming pool.
It is a large pool, although not quite Olympic size.
To swim a mile you must complete eighty-two lengths, which, in its very tedium, often feels as much a mental exercise as a physical one.
The water is kept unusually warm, to please the majority of people who patronize the health center, the kind who come not so much to swim as to lounge poolside or rest their bodies in the sauna.
Fatou has swum here five or six times now, and she is often the youngest person in the pool by several decades.
Generally, the clientele are white, or else South Asian or from the Middle East, but now and then Fatou finds herself in the water with fellow-Africans.
When she spots these big men, paddling frantically like babies, struggling simply to stay afloat, she prides herself on her own abilities, having taught herself to swim, several years earlier, at the Carib Beach Resort, in Accra.
Not in the hotel pool- no employees were allowed in the pool.
No, she learned by struggling through the rough gray sea, on the other side of the resort walls. Rising and sinking, rising and sinking, on the dirty foam.
No tourist ever stepped onto the beach (it was covered with trash), much less into the cold and treacherous sea.
Nor did any of the other chambermaids. Only some reckless teen-age boys, late at night, and Fatou, early in the morning.
There is almost no way to compare swimming at Carib Beach and swimming in the health center, warm as it is, tranquil as a bath.
And, as Fatou passes the Embassy of Cambodia, on her way to the pool, over the high wall she sees a shuttlecock, passed back and forth between two unseen players.
The shuttlecock floats in a wide arc softly rightward, and is smashed back, and this happens again and again, the first player always somehow able to retrieve the smash and transform it, once more, into a gentle, floating arc.
High above, the sun tries to force its way through a cloud ceiling, gray and filled with water.
Pock, smash. Pock, smash.
When the Embassy of Cambodia first appeared in our midst, a few years ago, some of us said, "Well, if we were poets perhaps we could have written some sort of an ode about this surprising appearance of the embassy."
For embassies are usually to be found in the center of the city. This was the first one we had seen in the suburbs.
But we are not really a poetic people. We are from Willesden. Our minds tend toward the prosaic.
I doubt there is a man or woman among us, for example, who- upon passing the Embassy of Cambodia for the first time- did not immediately think: "genocide."
Pock, smash. Pock, smash.
This summer we watched the Olympics, becoming well attuned to grunting, and to the many other human sounds associated with effort and the triumph of the will.
But the players in the garden of the Embassy of Cambodia are silent.
We can't say for sure that it is a garden- we have a limited view over the wall. It may well be a paved area, reserved for badminton.)
The only sign that a game of badminton is under way at all is the motion of the shuttlecock itself, alternately being lobbed and smashed, lobbed and smashed, and always at the hour that Fatou passes on her way to the health center to swim (just after ten in the morning on Mondays).
It should be explained that it is Fatou's employers- and not Fatou- who are the true members of this health club; they have no idea that she uses their guest passes in this way.
Mr. and Mrs. Derawal and their three children- aged seventeen, fifteen, and ten- live on the same street as the embassy, but the road is almost a mile long, with the embassy at one end and the Derawals at the other.
Fatou's deception is possible only because on Mondays Mr. Derawal drives to Eltham to visit his mini-market there, and Mrs. Derawal works the counter in the family's second mini-mart, in Kensal Rise.
In the slim drawer of a faux-Louis XVI console, in the entrance hall of the Derawals' primary residence, one can find a stockpile of guest passes.
Nobody besides Fatou seems to remember that they are there.
Since August 6th (the first occasion on which she noticed the badminton), Fatou has made a point of pausing by the bus stop opposite the embassy for five or ten minutes before she goes in to swim, idle minutes she can hardly afford (Mrs. Derawal returns to the house at lunchtime) and yet seems unable to forgo.
Such is the strangely compelling aura of the embassy.
Usually, Fatou gains nothing from this waiting and observing, but on a few occasions she has seen people arrive at the embassy and watched as they are buzzed through the gate.
Young white people carrying rucksacks. Often they are scruffy, and wearing sandals, despite the cool weather.
None of the visitors so far have been visibly Cambodian. These young people are likely looking for visas. They are buzzed in and then pass through the gate, although Fatou would really have to stand on top of the bus stop to get a view of whoever it is that lets them in.
What she can say with certainty is that these occasional arrivals have absolutely no effect on the badminton, which continues in its steady pattern, first gentle, then fast, first soft and high, then hard and low.
On the twentieth of August, long after the Olympians had returned to their respective countries, Fatou noticed that a basketball hoop had appeared in the far corner of the garden, its net of synthetic white rope rising high enough to be seen over the wall.
But no basketball was ever played- at least not when Fatou was passing.
The following week it had been moved closer to Fatou's side of the wall.
It must be a mobile hoop, on casters.
Fatou waited a week, two weeks, but still no basketball game replaced the badminton, which carried on as before.
When I say that we were surprised by the appearance of the Embassy of Cambodia, I don't mean to suggest that the embassy is in any way unique in its peculiarity.
In fact, this long, wide street is notable for a number of curious buildings, in the context of which the Embassy of Cambodia does not seem especially strange.
There is a mansion called GARYLAND, with something else in Arabic engraved below GARYLAND, and both the English and the Arabic text are inlaid in pink-and-green marble pillars that bookend a gigantic fence, far higher than the embassy's, better suited to a fortress.
Dramatic golden gates open automatically to let vehicles in and out.
At any one time, GARYLAND has five to seven cars parked in its driveway.
There is a house with a huge pink elephant on the doorstep, apparently made of mosaic tiles.
There is a Catholic nunnery with a single red Ford Focus parked in front. There is a Sikh institute. There is a faux-Tudor house with a pool that Mickey Rooney rented for a season, while he was performing in the West End fifteen summers ago.
That house sits opposite a dingy retirement home, where one sometimes sees distressed souls, barely covered by their dressing gowns, standing on their tiny balconies, staring into the tops of the chestnut trees.
So we are hardly strangers to curious buildings, here in Willesden & Brondesbury. And yet still we find the Embassy of Cambodia a little surprising. It is not the right sort of surprise, somehow.
In a discarded Metro found on the floor of the Derawal kitchen, Fatou read with interest a story about a Sudanese "slave" living in a rich man's house in London.
It was not the first time that Fatou had wondered if she herself was a slave, but this story, brief as it was, confirmed in her own mind that she was not.
After all, it was her father, and not a kidnapper, who had taken her from Ivory Coast to Ghana, and when they reached Accra they had both found employment in the same hotel.
Two years later, when she was eighteen, it was her father again who had organized her difficult passage to Libya and then on to Italy- a not insignificant financial sacrifice on his part.
Also, Fatou could read English- and speak a little Italian- and this girl in the paper could not read or speak anything except the language of her tribe.
And nobody beat Fatou, although Mrs. Derawal had twice slapped her in the face, and the two older children spoke to her with no respect at all and thanked her for nothing.
Sometimes she heard her name used as a term of abuse between them. "You're as black as Fatou." Or "You're as stupid as Fatou."
On the other hand, just like the girl in the newspaper, she had not seen her passport with her own eyes since she arrived at the Derawals', and she had been told from the start that her wages were to be retained by the Derawals to pay for the food and water and heat she would require during her stay, as well as to cover the rent for the room she slept in.
In the final analysis, however, Fatou was not confined to the house.
She had an Oyster Card, given to her by the Derawals, and was trusted to do the food shopping and other outside tasks for which she was given cash and told to return with change and receipts for everything.
If she did not go out in the evenings that was only because she had no money with which to go out, and anyway knew very few people in London.
Whereas the girl in the paper was not allowed to leave her employers' premises, not ever- she was a prisoner.
On Sunday mornings, for example, Fatou regularly left the house to meet her church friend Andrew Okonkwo at the 98 bus stop and go with him to worship at the Sacred Heart of Jesus, just off the Kilburn High Road.