An Honest Exit
Thirty-five years after my father left Ethiopia, he died in a room in a boarding house in Peoria, Illinois, that came with a partial view of the river.
We had never spoken much during his lifetime, but, on a warm October morning in New York shortly after he died, I found myself having a conversation with him as I walked north on Amsterdam Avenue, toward the high school where for the past three years I had been teaching a course in Early American literature to privileged freshmen.
"That's the Academy right there," I told him. "You can see the top of the bell tower through the trees.
I'm the only one who calls it the Academy.
That's not its real name.
I stole it from a short story by Kafka that I read in college - a monkey who's been trained to talk gives a speech to an academy.
I used to wonder if that was how my students and the other teachers, even with all their liberal, cultured learning, saw me - as a monkey trying to teach their language back to them.
Do you remember how you spoke? I hated it.
You used those short, broken sentences that sounded as if you were spitting out the words, as if you had just learned them but already despised them, even the simplest ones. 'Take this.' 'Don't touch.' 'Leave now.' "
I arrived in my classroom ten minutes before the bell rang, just as the first of my students trickled in. They were the smartest, and took their seats near the center.
The rest arrived in no discernible order, but I noticed that all of them, smart and stupid alike, seemed hardly to talk, or, if they talked, it was only in whispers.
Most said hello as they entered, but their voices were more hesitant than usual, as if they weren't sure that it was really me they were addressing.
"I'm sorry for having missed class the other day," I began, and because I felt obliged to explain my absence I told them the truth.
"My father passed away recently. I had to attend to his affairs."
And yet, because I had just finished talking to him, I felt that I hadn't said enough.
So I continued. "He was sixty-seven years old when he died.
He was born in a small village in northern Ethiopia.
He was thirty-two when he left his home for a port town in Sudan in order to come here."
And while I could have ended there I had no desire to.
I needed a history more complete than the strangled bits that he had owned and passed on to me - a short, brutal tale of having been trapped as a stowaway on a ship.
So I continued with my father's story, knowing that I could make up the missing details as I went.
He was an engineer before he left Ethiopia, I told my students, but after spending several months in prison for attending a political rally banned by the government he was reduced to nothing.
He knew that if he returned home he would eventually be arrested again, and that this time he wouldn't survive, so he took what little he had left and followed a group of men who told him that they were heading to Sudan, because it was the only way out.
For one week he walked west.
He had never been in this part of the country before.
Everything was flat, from the land to the horizon, one uninterrupted stream that not even a cloud dared to break.
The fields were thick with wild green grass and bursts of yellow flowers.
Eventually he found a ride on the back of a pickup truck already crowded with refugees heading toward the border.
Every few hours, they passed a village, each one a cluster of thatch-roofed huts with a dirt road carved down the middle, where children eagerly waved as the refugees passed, as if the simple fact that they were travelling in a truck meant they were off to someplace better.
When he finally arrived at the port town in Sudan, he had already lost a dozen pounds.
His slightly bulbous nose stood in stark contrast to the sunken cheeks and wide eyes that seemed to have been buried deep above them.
His clothes fit him poorly.
His hands looked larger; the bones were more visible.
He thought his fingers were growing.
This was the farthest from home he had ever travelled, but he knew that he couldn't stay there.
He wanted to leave the entire continent far behind, for Europe or America, where life was rumored to be better.
It was the oldest port in Sudan and one of the oldest cities in the country.
At its peak, fifty thousand people had lived there, but now only a fraction of the population was left.
Several wars had been fought nearby, the last one in 1970, between a small group of rebels and the government.
There were burned-out tanks on the edge of town and dozens of half-destroyed, abandoned houses.
There was sand and dust everywhere, and on most days the temperature came close to a hundred degrees.
The people who lived there were desperately poor.
Some worked as fishermen but most spent their days by the dock, looking for work unloading crates from the dozens of small freight ships in the harbor.
My father was told that he could find a job there, and that if he was patient and earned enough money he could even buy his way out of the country on one of the boats.
The bell for the end of first period rang then.
My students waited a moment before gathering their bags and leaving; they were either compelled or baffled by what I had told them.
I tried to see them all in one long glance before they were gone.
They had always been just bodies to me, a prescribed number that came and went each day of the semester until they were replaced by others, who would do the same.
For a few seconds, though, I saw them clearly - the deliberately rumpled hair of the boys and the neat, tidy composure of the girls in opposition.
They were still in the making, each and every one of them.
Somehow I had missed that.
None of them looked away or averted their gaze from mine, which I took as confirmation that I could continue.
As I walked home that night I was aware of a growing vortex of e-mails and text messages being passed among my students.
Millions of invisible bits of data were being transmitted through underground cable wires and satellite networks, and I was their sole subject and object of concern.
I don't know why I found so much comfort in that thought, but it nearly lifted me off the ground, and suddenly, everywhere, I felt embraced. As I walked down Riverside Drive, with the Hudson River and the rush of traffic pouring up and down the West Side Highway to my right, the tightly controlled neighborhood borders and divisions hardly mattered.
The next day at the Academy I told my students at the start of class that they could put their anthologies and worksheets away. "We won't be needing them for now," I said.
My father's first job at the port was bringing tea to the dockworkers, a job for which he was paid only in tips - a few cents here and there that gradually added up.
On an average day, he would serve anywhere between three and five hundred cups of tea.
He could carry as many as ten at a time on a large wooden platter that he learned to balance on his forearm.
As a child he had been clumsy; his father would often yell at him for breaking a glass or for being unable to bring him a cup of coffee without spilling it.
So as soon as he got the job he began practicing at night with a tray full of stones that were as light as the cups of tea.
If the stones moved he knew he had failed and would try again, until eventually he probably could have walked several miles without spilling a drop of tea or shifting a single stone.
He hid his earnings in a pocket sewn into the inside of his pants.
The one friend he had in town, a man by the name of Abrahim, had told him never to let anyone know how much money he had: "If someone sees you have two dollars, he will think you have twenty.
It's always better to make people think you have nothing at all."
Abrahim was the one who found him the job carrying tea.
He met my father on his third day in town and knew immediately that he was a foreigner.
He went up to him and said, in perfect English, "Hello.
My name is Abrahim, like the prophet.
Let me help you while you're in this town."
He was several inches shorter and better dressed than most of the other men that my father had seen there.
His head was bald, with the exception of two graying tufts of hair that arced behind his ears.
The last two fingers on his right hand looked as if they had been crushed and then tied together.
He bowed slightly when he introduced himself and walked with what might have been a small limp, which in my father's mind made trusting him easier.
At first, my father slept outside, near the harbor, where hundreds of other men also camped out, most of them refugees like him.
Abrahim had told him that it was dangerous to sleep alone, but he had also said that if he slept in the town he was certain to be beaten and arrested by the police.
After a week out there, he heard footsteps near his head just as he was falling asleep.
When he opened his eyes and looked up he saw three men standing nearby, their backs all slightly turned to him, so that he could see only their long white djellabahs, dirty but not nearly as filthy as some of the others that he had recently seen.
As he watched, one of the men lifted his hands into the air slowly, as if he were struggling to pass something over his head.
He recited a prayer that my father had heard several times on his way to Sudan and on multiple occasions in Ethiopia at the homes of Muslim friends.
The man repeated the prayer a second and then a third time, and when he was finished the two other men bent down and picked up what at first appeared to be a sack of grain but which, he realized a second later, was clearly a body.
The man had been lying there when my father went to sleep. There had been nothing to indicate that he was dead or even injured.
When my father told Abrahim the next day, his response was simple: "Don't think about it too much.
It's easy to die around here and have no one notice."
He promised to find my father a better place to sleep, and he did.
Later that same day, he found my father preparing his mat near the harbor, and told him to follow him.
"I have a surprise for you," he said.
The owner of the boarding house where he was going to stay from now on was a business associate of Abrahim's. "We've worked together many times over the years," Abrahim told my father, although he never explained what they did.
When my father asked him how he could repay his kindness, he waved the question away.
"Don't worry," Abrahim told him. "You can do something for me later. "
Unlike most of what I had told my students so far, Abrahim had a real history that I could draw on.