The Cage Man
All day long they kept Horace Nimms in a steel-barred cage.
For twenty-one years he had perched on a tall stool in that cage, while various persons at various times poked things at him through a hole about big enough to admit an adult guinea pig. Every evening round five-thirty they let Horace out and permitted him to go over to his half of a double-barreled house in Flatbush to sleep.
At eight- thirty the next morning he returned to his cage, hung his two-dollar-and- eighty-nine-cent approximately Panama hat on a peg and changed his blue-serge- suit coat for a still more shiny alpaca.
Then he sharpened two pencils to needle-point sharpness, tested his pen by writing "H. Nimms, Esq.," in a small precise hand, gave his adding machine a few preparatory pokes and was ready for the day's work.
Horace was proud, in his mild way, of being shut up in the cage with all that money.
It carried the suggestion that he was a dangerous man of a possibly predatory nature.
He wasn't.
A more patient and docile five feet and two inches of cashier was not to be found between Spuyten Duyvil and Tottenville, Staten Island.
Cashiers are mostly crabbed.
It sours them somehow to hand out all that money and retain so little for their own personal use.
But Horace was not of this ilk.
The timidest stenographer did not hesitate to take the pettiest petty-cash slip to his little window and twitter, according to custom: "Forty cents for carbon paper, and let me have it in large bills, please, Uncle Horace."
He would peer at the slip, pretend it was for forty dollars, smile a friendly smile that made little ripples round his eyes and- according to custom--reply: "Here you be.
Now don't be buying yourself a flivver with it."
When the office force in a large corporation calls the office cashier "uncle" it is a pretty good indication of the sort of man he is.
For the rest, Horace Nimms was slightly bald, wore convict eye-glasses--the sort you shackle to your head with a chain- kept his cuffs up with lavender sleeve garters, carried a change purse, kept a small red pocket expense book, thought his company the greatest in the world and its president, Oren Hammer, the greatest man, was devoted to a wife and two growing daughters, dreamed of a cottage on Long Island with a few square yards of beets and beans and, finally, earned forty dollars a week.
Horace Nimms had a figuring mind.
Those ten little Arabic symbols and their combinations and permutations held a fascination for him.
To his ears six times six is thirty-six was as perfect a poem as ever a master bard penned.
When on muggy Flatbush nights he tossed in his brass bed he lulled himself to sleep by dividing 695,481,239 by 433.
At other and more wakeful moments he amused himself by planning an elaborate cost-accounting system for his firm, the Amalgamated Soap Corporation, known to the ends of the earth as the Suds Trust.
Sometimes he went so far as to play the entertaining game of imaginary conversations.
He pictured himself sitting in one of the fat chairs in the office of President Hammer and saying between puffs on one of the presidential perfectos: "Now, looky here, Mr. Hammer.
My plan for a cost-accounting system is-"
And he limned on his mental canvas that great man, spellbound, enthralled, as he, Horace Nimms, dazzled him with an array of figures, beginning: "Now, let's see, Mr. Hammer.
Last year the Western works at Purity City, Iowa, made 9,576,491 cakes of Pink Petal Toilet and 6,571,233 cakes of Lily White Laundry at a manufacturing cost of 3.25571 cents a cake, unboxed; now the selling cost a cake was"- and so on.
The interview always ended with vigorous hand-shakings on the part of Mr. Hammer and more salary for Mr. Nimms.
But actually the interview never took place.
It wasn't that Horace didn't have confidence in his system.
He did.
But he didn't have an equal amount in Horace Nimms.
So he worked on in his little cage and enjoyed a fair measure of contentment there, because to him it was a temple of figures, a shrine of subtraction, an altar of addition.
Figures swarmed in his head as naturally as bees swarm about a locust tree.
He could tell you off-hand how many cakes of Grade-B soap the Southern Works at Spotless, Louisiana, made in the month of May, 1914.
He simply devoured statistics.
When the door of the cage clanged shut in the morning he felt soothed, at home; he immersed his own small worries in a bath of digits and decimal points.
He ate of the lotus leaves of mathematics.
He could forget, while juggling with millions of cakes of soap and thousands of dollars, that his rent was due next week; that Polly, his wife, needed a new dress; and that on forty a week one must live largely on beef liver and hope.
He sometimes thought, while Subwaying to his office, that if he could only get the ear of Oren Hammer some day and tell him about that cost-accounting system he might get his salary raised to forty-five.
But President Hammer, whose office was on the floor above the cage, was as remote from Horace as the Pleiades.
To get to see him one had to run a gantlet of superior, inquisitive secretaries.
Besides Mr. Hammer was reputed to be the busiest man in New York City.
"I wash the faces of forty million people every morning," was the way he put it himself.
But the chief reason why Horace Nimms did not approach Mr. Hammer was that Horace held him in genuine awe.
The president was so big, so masterful, so decisive.
His invariable cutaway intimidated Horace; the magnificence of his top hat dazzled the little cashier and benumbed his faculties of speech.
Once in a while Horace rode down in the same elevator with him and- unobserved- admired his firm profile, the concentration of his brow and the jutting jaw that some one had once said was worth fifty thousand a year in itself, merely as a symbol of determination.
Horace would sooner have slapped General Pershing on the back or asked President Wilson to dinner in Flatbush than have addressed Oren Hammer.
An uncommendable attitude?
Yes.
But after all those years behind bars, perhaps subconsciously his spirit had become a little caged.
One cool September morning Horace entered the cage humming "Annie Rooney."
Coming over in the Subway he had straightened out a little quirk in his cost- accounting system that would save the company one-ninety-fifth of a cent a cake.
He took off his worn serge coat, was momentarily concerned at the prospect of having to make it last another season and then with a hitch on his lavender sleeve garters he slipped into his alpaca office coat and added up a few numbers on the adding machine for the sheer joy of it.
He had not been sitting on his high stool long when he became aware that a man, a stranger, was regarding him fixedly through the steel screen.
The man had calmly placed a chair just outside the cage and was examining the little cashier with the scrutinizing eye of an ornithologist studying a newly discovered species of emu.
Horace was a bit disconcerted.
He knew his accounts were in order and accurate to the last penny.
He had nothing to fear on that score.
Nevertheless, he didn't like the way the man stared at him.
"If he has something to say to me," thought Horace, "why does he say it with glowers?"
He would have asked the starer what the devil he was looking at, but Horace was incapable of incivility.
He began nervously to total up a column of figures and was not a little upset to find that under the cold gaze he had made his first mistake in addition since the spring of '98.
He cast a furtive glance or two through the steel netting at the stranger outside, who continued to focus a pair of prominent blue eyes on the self-conscious cashier.
Horace couldn't have explained why those particular eyes rattled him; some mysterious power--black art perhaps.
The staring man was quite bald, and his head, shaped like a pineapple cheese, had been polished until it seemed almost to glitter in the September sun.
The eyes, light blue and bulgy, reminded Horace of poached eggs left out in the cold for a week.
They had also a certain fishy quality; impassive, yet hungry, like a shark's.
Without being actually fat, the mysterious starer had the appearance of being plump and soft; perhaps it was the way he clasped two small, perfectly manicured hands over a perceptible rotundity at his middle, an unexpected protuberance, as if he were attempting to conceal a honeydew melon under his vest.
Horace Nimms did his best to concentrate on the little columns of figures he was so fond of drilling and parading, but his glance strayed, almost against his will, to the bald-headed man with the fishy blue eyes, who continued to fasten on Horace the glance a python aims at a rabbit before he bolts him.
At length, after half an hour, Horace could stand it no longer.
He addressed the stranger politely.
"Is there anything I can do for you?" asked Horace with his avuncular smile.
The starer, without once taking his eyes off Horace, rose, advanced to the little window and thrust through it an oversized card.
"You may go on with your work," he said, "just as if you were not under observation.
I am here under Mr. Hammer's orders."
His voice was peculiar- a nasal purr.
The caged cashier glanced at the card.
It read:
S. WALMSLEY COWAN
EFFICIENCY EXPERT EXTRAORDINARY
AUTHOR OF "PEP, PERSONALITY, PERSONNEL,"
"HOW TO ENTHUSE EMPLOYEES"
Horace Nimms had a disquieting sensation.
He had heard rumors of a man prowling about in the company, subjecting random employees to strange tests, firing some, moving others to different jobs, but he had always felt that twenty-one years of service and the steel bars of his cage protected him.
And now here was the man, and he, Horace Nimms, was under observation.
He had always associated the phrase with reports of lunacy cases in the newspapers.
Mr. Cowan returned to his seat near the cage and resumed his silent watch on its inmate.
Horace tried to do his work, but he couldn't remember when he had had such a poor day.
The figures would come wrong and his hand would tremble a little no matter how hard he tried to forget the vigilant Mr. Cowan who sat watching him.
At the end of a trying day Horace dismounted from his high stool, hitched up his lavender sleeve garters and inserted himself into his worn blue serge coat.
He would be glad to get back to Flatbush.
Polly would have some fried beef liver and a bread pudding for supper, and they would discuss for the hundredth time just what the ground-floor plan of that cottage would be- if it ever was.
But Mr. Cowan was waiting for him.
"Step this way, will you--ple-e-ese," said the expert.
Horace never remembered when he had heard a word that retained so little of its original meaning as Mr. Cowan's "ple-e-ese."
Clearly it was tossed in as a sop to the hypersensitive.
His "ple-e-ese" could have been translated as "you worm."
Horace, with a worried brow, followed Mr. Cowan into one of those goldfish- bowl offices affected by large companies with many executives and a limited amount of office space.
It contained only a plain table and two stiff chairs.
"Sit down," said Mr. Cowan, "ple-e-ese."
It is a difficult linguistic feat to purr and snap at the same time, but Mr. Cowan achieved it.