Drinking coffee elsewhere
Orientation games began the day I arrived at Yale from Baltimore.
In my group we played heady, frustrating games for smart people.
One game appeared to be charades reinterpreted by existentialists; another involved listening to rocks.
Then a freshman counsellor made everyone play Trust. The idea was that if you had the faith to fall backward and wait for four scrawny former high-school geniuses to catch you, just before your head cracked on the slate sidewalk, then you might learn to trust your fellow-students.
Russian roulette sounded like a better game.
No way, I said.
The white boys were waiting for me to fall, holding their arms out for me, sincerely, gallantly. "No fucking way."
It's all cool, it's all cool, the counsellor said.
Her hair was a shade of blond I'd seen only on Playboy covers, and she raised her hands as though backing away from a growling dog. "Sister," she said, in an I'm-down-with-the-struggle voice, "you don't have to play this game.
As a person of color, you shouldn't have to fit into any white, patriarchal system."
I said, "It's a bit too late for that."
In the next game, all I had to do was wait in a circle until it was my turn to say what inanimate object I wanted to be.
One guy said he'd like to be a gadfly, like Socrates.
"Stop me if I wax Platonic," he said.
The girl next to him was eating a rice cake. She wanted to be the Earth, she said.
Earth with a capital "E."
There was one other black person in the circle.
He wore an Exeter T-shirt and his overly elastic expressions resembled a series of facial exercises.
At the end of each person's turn, he smiled and bobbed his head with unfettered enthusiasm.
"Oh, that was good," he said, as if the game were an experiment he'd set up and the results were turning out better than he'd expected. "Good, good, good!"
When it was my turn I said, "My name is Dina, and if I had to be any object, I guess I'd be a revolver."
The sunlight dulled as if on cue.
Clouds passed rapidly overhead, presaging rain.
I don't know why I said it.
Until that moment I'd been good in all the ways that were meant to matter.
I was an honor-roll student - though I'd learned long ago not to mention it in the part of Baltimore where I lived.
Suddenly I was hard-bitten and recalcitrant, the kind of kid who took pleasure in sticking pins into cats; the kind who chased down smart kids to spray them with mace.
A revolver, a counsellor said, stroking his chin, as if it had grown a rabbinical beard. "Could you please elaborate?"
The black guy cocked his head and frowned, as if the beakers and Erlenmeyer flasks of his experiment had grown legs and scurried off.
You were just kidding, the dean said, "about wiping out all of mankind.
That, I suppose, was a joke."
She squinted at me. One of her hands curved atop the other to form a pink, freckled molehill on her desk.
Well, I said, "maybe I meant it at the time."
I quickly saw that that was not the answer she wanted.
"I don't know. I think it's the architecture."
Through the dimming light of the dean's-office window, I could see the fortress of the old campus.
On my ride from the bus station to the campus, I'd barely glimpsed New Haven - a flash of crumpled building here, a trio of straggly kids there.
A lot like Baltimore.
But everything had changed when we reached those streets hooded by the gothic buildings.
I imagined how the college must have looked when it was founded, when most of the students owned slaves.
I pictured men wearing tights and knickers, smoking pipes.
The architecture, the dean repeated.
She bit her lip and seemed to be making a calculation of some sort.
I noticed that she blinked less often than most people.
I sat there, waiting to see how long it would be before she blinked again.
My revolver comment won me a year's worth of psychiatric counselling, weekly meetings with Dean Guest, and - since the parents of the roommate I'd never met weren't too hip on the idea of their Amy sharing a bunk bed with a budding homicidal loony - my very own room.
Shortly after getting my first D, I also received the first knock on my door.
The female counsellors never knocked.
The dean had spoken to them; I was a priority.
Every other day, right before dinnertime, they'd look in on me, unannounced.
"Just checking up," a counsellor would say.
It was the voice of a suburban mother in training.
By the second week, I had made a point of sitting in a chair in front of the door, just when I expected a counsellor to pop her head around. This was intended to startle them.
I also made a point of being naked.
The unannounced visits ended.
The knocking persisted.
Through the peephole I saw a white face, distorted and balloonish.
Let me in. The person looked like a boy but sounded like a girl.
"Let me in," the voice repeated.
Not a chance, I said.
Then the person began to sob, and I heard a back slump against the door.
If I hadn't known the person was white from the peephole, I'd have known it from a display like this.
Black people didn't knock on strangers' doors, crying. Not that I understood the black people at Yale. There was something pitiful in how cool they were.
Occasionally one would reach out to me with missionary zeal, but I'd rebuff that person with haughty silence.
I don't have anyone to talk to! the person on the other side of the door cried.
That is correct.
When I was a child, the person said, "I played by myself in a corner of the schoolyard all alone.
I hated dolls and I hated games, animals were not friendly and birds flew away.
If anyone was looking for me I hid behind a tree and cried out 'I am an orphan - ' "
I opened the door.
It was a she.
Plagiarist!
I yelled.
She had just recited a Frank O'Hara poem as though she'd thought it up herself.
I knew the poem because it was one of the few things I'd been forced to read that I wished I'd written myself.
The girl turned to face me, smiling weakly, as though her triumph were not in getting me to open the door but in the fact that she was able to smile at all when she was so accustomed to crying.
She was large but not obese, and crying had turned her face the color of raw chicken.
She blew her nose into the waist end of her T-shirt, revealing a pale belly.
How do you know that poem?
She sniffed. "I'm in your Contemporary Poetry class."
She was Canadian and her name was Heidi, although she said she wanted people to call her Henrik.
"That's a guy's name," I said. "What do you want? A sex change?"
She looked at me with so little surprise that I suspected she hadn't discounted this as an option.
Then her story came out in teary, hiccup-like bursts.
She had sucked some "cute guy's dick" and he'd told everybody and now people thought she was "a slut."
Why'd you suck his dick? Aren't you a lesbian?
She fit the bill. Short hair, hard, roach-stomping shoes. Dressed like an aspiring plumber.
The lesbians I'd seen on TV were wiry, thin strips of muscle, but Heidi was round and soft and had a moonlike face.
And lesbians had cats.
"Do you have a cat?" I asked.
Her eyes turned glossy with new tears.
"No," she said, her voice wavering, "and I'm not a lesbian.
Are you?"
Do I look like one? I said.
She didn't answer.
O.K. I said. "I could suck a guy's dick, too, if I wanted.
But I don't.
The human penis is one of the most germ-ridden objects there is."
Heidi looked at me, unconvinced.
"What I meant to say," I began again, "is that I don't like anybody.
Period.
Guys or girls.
I'm a misanthrope."
I am, too.
No, I said, guiding her back through my door and out into the hallway. "You're not."
Have you had dinner? she asked. "Let's go to Commons."
I pointed to a pyramid of ramen-noodle packages on my windowsill. "See that?
That means I never have to go to Commons.
Aside from class, I have contact with no one."
I hate it here, too, she said.
"I should have gone to McGill, eh."
The way to feel better, I said, "is to get some ramen and lock yourself in your room.
Everyone will forget about you and that guy's dick and you won't have to see anyone ever again. If anyone looks for you - "I'll hide behind a tree.
A revolver?
Dr. Raeburn said, flipping through a manila folder.
He looked up at me as if to ask another question, but he didn't.
Dr. Raeburn was the psychiatrist.
He had the gray hair and whiskers of a Civil War general.
He was also a chain smoker with beige teeth and a navy wool jacket smeared with ash.
He asked about the revolver at the beginning of my first visit.
When I was unable to explain myself he smiled, as if this were perfectly respectable.
Tell me about your parents.
I wondered what he already had on file. The folder was thick, though I hadn't said a thing of significance since Day One.
My father was a dick and my mother seemed to like him.
He patted his pockets for his cigarettes.
"That's some heavy stuff," he said. "How do you feel about Dad?"
The man couldn't say the word "father."
"Is Dad someone you see often?"
I hate my father almost as much as I hate the word 'Dad.'
He started tapping his cigarette.
You can't smoke in here.
That's right, he said, and slipped the cigarette back into the packet.
He smiled, widening his eyes brightly. "Don't ever start."
I thought that that first encounter would be the last of Heidi, but then her head appeared in a window of Linsly-Chit during my Chaucer class. Next, she swooped down a flight of stairs in Harkness.
She hailed me from across Elm Street and found me in the Sterling Library stacks.
After one of my meetings with Dr. Raeburn, she was waiting for me outside Health Services, legs crossed, cleaning her fingernails.
You know, she said, as we walked through Old Campus, "you've got to stop eating ramen. Not only does it lack a single nutrient but it's full of MSG."
I like eating chemicals," I said. "It keeps the skin radiant."
There's also hepatitis.
She already knew how to get my attention - mention a disease.
You get hepatitis from unwashed lettuce, I said. "If there's anything safe from the perils of the food chain, it's ramen."
But you refrigerate what you don't eat.
Each time you reheat it, you're killing good bacteria, which then can't keep the bad bacteria in check.
A guy got sick from reheating Chinese noodles, and his son died from it.
I read it in the Times.
With this, she put a jovial arm around my neck.
I continued walking, a little stunned.
Then, just as quickly, she dropped her arm and stopped walking.