Means of Suppressing Demonstrations
Lea, the officer, had stopped feeling her own body.
She lay on top of an anti-sniper barricade, holding up a page from a newspaper, blocking the stars.
She had to stretch out her arms to hold the wide page above her head.
"Oh," she said.
"The Army didn't do it," Tomer said.
He flicked his cigarette butt down onto the asphalt of Route 799.
He was talking about Huda, the little Palestinian girl on the beach.
The picture in the newspaper showed her screaming on red sand, amid the body parts of the seven people who had been her family.
"I know," she said.
"This is a manipulation."
The world said that the Israeli Army had done it with artillery fire, but the Israeli Army knew that the family had been killed by a dormant shell that Palestinian militants had left by the sea.
Lea looked at Tomer.
The orange light of the road lamps lit him from behind, so that he could have been a demon.
He was nineteen, two years younger than the officer.
"It's just that I can't feel my body all of a sudden," she said.
"Again?"
Lea often told him that she couldn't feel her body.
That she could move it, but not feel it.
That those were two separate things.
He never questioned her; he pushed her.
This was what she wanted.
Tomer took his weapon off his back and pressed her shoulders into the concrete.
When their pants were pulled down, he pressed his hands on her neck, then her arms.
He called her Lea during the day, because it was her name, and because she said he could.
At night, when he pulled her hair so hard that her scalp buzzed, he called her Officer, because it was what she said he should call her then.
When she looked to the side, she could see the warm glow that came from the homes of people in nearby villages.
She knew that her military service was approaching its end, but could not feel it.
She could not imagine or remember any of the things she had wanted before she became a soldier, and struggled to find things she wanted for her civilian life ahead.
She guessed that she must want a family, or to get into a good school, but she guessed this from the data around her.
She did not feel the want herself.
When she first began feeling this way, less than a year into her service, after the neck of one of the soldiers at her checkpoint was cut almost in half, she decided that the only reasonable thing she could truly want must exist inside the Army, so she applied to become an officer.
She did not want to be a dumb checkpoint soldier anymore, the type whose neck could get cut almost in half.
She wanted to be able to yell at soldiers who put their necks where they might get cut.
She grew to accept that her service time would begin and end in the Transitions Unit, but figured that if she had to be at a checkpoint she might as well be an officer.
Tomer did almost everything that she asked of him.
He was a sensible nineteen-year-old boy.
And Lea, she had a certain beauty, after all.
A cold, humming, unfazed beauty, and great breasts.
She was also the only girl sprinkled into his days.
Lea woke up alone in her field bed the next morning.
She had her own tent, because she was the only female at the checkpoint.
It was an odd posting.
Route 799 cut through the West Bank, but had been closed to Palestinians since 2002, when the motorcyclists were shot.
The Army needed four soldiers and a commanding officer to staff an improvised checkpoint every hundred kilometres or so, so she found herself commanding four boys who took shifts on an always deserted road.
But if anyone did decide to show, even after all this time, there would be someone there to say, "Sorry, the road is blocked."
The posting would have made her angry, except she knew that her service would be over in a few weeks anyway.
She spent the day in bed, reading a prep book for university entrance exams.
She hoped to score high enough to study business.
She was supposed to check in with the boy on duty twice a shift, but she didn't bother, because nothing ever happened.
Except, that day, something did.
Tomer, who had the afternoon shift, called her military cell to say that there were three Palestinian male demonstrators at the checkpoint.
"Have they thrown rocks or anything?" she asked.
"No, but they have a sign.
And they keep on asking me to, like, disperse them, even though I explained that we don't have any means of suppressing demonstrations here."
"That's not true."
She was suddenly more excited than she had been since she was posted to Route 799.
As an officer, she knew that every checkpoint had a supply box to be used in case of demonstrations.
And, if the demonstrators insisted, she must aim to please.
She unlocked the metal supply closet in her tent and pulled out a wooden box.
It was heavy, so it took her a while to carry it to the anti-sniper barricade, and then to cross the road to the sun umbrella that marked the checkpoint.
"We had a lesson about demonstrations and stuff in boot camp, but I forget," Tomer said.
Two of the demonstrators were in their thirties, and one was just a boy, a boy with his fingers in his mouth.
They had a piece of A4 paper on which they had written "Open 799" in English, with a marker.
One of the men was wearing a Guns N' Roses T-shirt.
He raised his hand, and so she signalled him to step forward.
When he was four steps away, she signalled him to halt.
"Officer, we are here to demonstrate against the restriction of our mobility, which is a collective punishment and against international law," the demonstrator said, in solid, accented Hebrew.
She put one hand on her weapon and one in her pocket.
"How come there are only three of you?
This is hardly a demonstration."
"I do apologize, Officer.
We have a wedding this week in the village, and, you see, other people, they are not serious," he said.
He bowed a little when he spoke.
"Is there any way you could disperse us just a little - enough for a press blast, or something?"
She had meant to be cruel, but the man was rather sweet.
He looked more like a bank customer asking for an increase of his credit limit than like a demonstrator.
It made her feel, a little, like this was the real world.
"We'll see what we can do," she said.
She sat on the asphalt and opened the wooden box.
There were printed instructions tucked inside a sheer nylon sleeve.
Tomer signalled the man to step back and wait, then he sat by her and they both read:
The purpose of Means of Suppressing Demonstrations is to suppress demonstrations.
It is intended to intimidate, and at most injure, but the purpose is not to kill.
One general guideline:
Use from light to heavy: shock, tear gas, rubber.
We must minimize damage when possible.
Grenade 30, the shock grenade, was designed to stun and scare by creating a loud noise.
The instructions said that, if detonated within two metres of a person, the grenade could damage the eardrums and cause light injuries, so Lea told the demonstrators to step back a bit.
They backed up, still facing the sun umbrella, and after a while the boy took his fingers out of his mouth and gave her a hesitant thumbs-up.
She didn't know quite how to respond, so she gave him a thumbs-up, too.
Then she quickly put her hand back on her weapon.
The shock grenade was orange, and cone-shaped. It had a red stripe encircling it.
She held it in her hand and then bent to the ground to lift a rock.
She dropped it into Tomer's hand.
"You're the soldier," she said.
"And, besides, it's been longer since I last learned about this stuff.
Let's practice."
They pretended that the rock was a grenade.
She gave him the instructions as if she knew them by heart.
She reminded him to keep the grenade in the palm of his hand and to secure the lever with his index finger.
She explained how to thread the middle finger of his left hand inside the safety, as if it were a ring, and to pull it with a spin of his wrist, as if he were checking his watch.
She raised her voice at him a bit, because he pulled his arm back for the practice throw without keeping his eyes on it.
"The instructions say after you take the safety out you have to look at the grenade at all times, because you only have three and a half seconds until it explodes.
What if you took your hand back and hit a wall?"
"But I know there's no wall behind me," he said.
"What if there were, suddenly?
What if a bird came?
It is not nice to have something explode in your hand, even a shock grenade."
After a couple of dry runs, it was time for the real thing.
The boy had his fingers in his mouth again, and one of the men was wiping his brow.
Heat radiated from the asphalt between them.
"O.K.?" she shouted. Then she and Tomer put their earplugs in.
She thought that anything one could guard against with pieces of foam could not be so powerful, but each time a grenade exploded she felt the noise in her hip bones like a jolt and in her mouth like a hint of metal.
After four grenades, the demonstration was dispersed.
Everything went according to plan, just as anyone who was standing in her position would have anticipated.
During her school years, she had felt as if every minute were part of a race. Get that grade. That boy. That shirt.
The Army was a numbing respite from that eighteen-year-long breathless race.
Whatever she did, the Army would end when it ended.
She would arrive at the same spot, that same station near the base where soldiers return their uniforms at long last.
Most of her days involved procedures and orders, going from one dot to the next in what appeared to be the only possible straight line.
She tried, a bit, still, sometimes, to jut out of the line, the way a drawn line jutted during her school years when her thumb on a ruler forced the pencil off course.
She tried with sex, with pain, with shocking newspaper articles, sometimes, but she did not try too hard.
TEAR GAS
The story in the newspaper that Tomer brought to the barracks that night was about a girl who'd been killed by her mother.
The girl was an Israeli Arab from a northern village, and she had got pregnant by her neighbor, who had raped her and was expected to receive a harsh sentence.
A picture showed the girl on the day of her high-school graduation, smiling and wearing jeans.
She had a generous, good-girl smile.
She looked like the kind of schoolgirl you couldn't even gossip with about soap-opera characters.
The mother was expected to receive a light sentence, because she had acted in the name of honor, and out of passion, and one has to respect another's culture.
She had used knives and a cane and a plastic bag, and she swore that she had first urged the girl to take her own life.
The officer let the boys keep the newspaper that the delivery truck brought every morning, with the understanding that Tomer would save her the most shocking parts to read at night.