The Cold Outside
Every now and then, I run around the countryside, delivering the warm, dark slop that farmers use to supplement the fodder for their cattle, blending the treacle with barley to make a sweet malty mix that the beasts can't get enough of.
I like going out on the farms, all quiet and lonely in the middle of the day; I like talking to the farmers and listening to their stories - men who have never been anywhere in all their born years save these hundred acres of ground, grown men haunted by their own holdings.
To be honest, I like hauling treacle more than anything else.
There are times when it's so thick and dark and solid you could walk on it, and we have to work hard to get it pumped out and into the big tanks, which are usually so old and creaky that you think they won't hold.
Sometimes they don't.
On a really warm day, one of the pipes, or maybe the wall of the tank, will give way, and there will be treacle everywhere: treacle and the smell of treacle that makes you dizzy, it's so sweet and strong.
It was hard work, but it was good being busy.
It gave me less time to dwell.
And I knew, when I started out that winter's morning, that I'd feel better coming home with a full day's work under my belt, knowing that I wasn't quite used up.
I thought about that all day, driving round the farms in the frosty light - about how I would keep going till I couldn't go on anymore.
All a man has is his work and his sense of himself, all the secret life he holds inside that nobody else can know.
That was how it had always been, even at home: my real life was separate from the day-to-day business that Sall knew or cared enough about to make decisions.
It wasn't that I didn't love her, at least to begin with; we got on well enough in the first few years.
It was just that we'd always been private people, in our different ways.
That was probably what made it possible for us to stay together after Caroline left. We knew how to keep ourselves to ourselves, a skill we had perfected through the years without even knowing how completely we had mastered it.
It was late in the afternoon, the sun just going down over the fields, the last of the light filtering through the trees and shrubs along the road by the old hospital.
The first green of evening, my mother had always called it, sitting on the back step at home, watching the Peruvian lilies and the montbretia fade into the gloaming.
I was never sure if that was a phrase of her own, or a quote from something, some radio drama, say, or a children's book she'd read to me in the days before memory.
Usually, if I got home early, this was my time.
While Sall made herself busy in the kitchen, I would sit in the dining room with the paper spread out on the table, or I would listen to the radio, staring out at the garden and fiddling with the dials to get a better signal.
That day, though, I had pulled a long run, only just finishing up at Jacob's Well Farm when the dark set in.
It had been a good day, but I knew I wasn't supposed to overdo it, so I was happy enough saying my goodbyes to Ben Walsh, who used to run Jacob's Well with his dad, and keeps it going himself now, his wife gone, no kids, both his parents dead.
He had been living alone like that for some years by then, which was maybe why he paid so much attention to the few people he encountered.
That day, it was attention I could have done without, but then he wasn't to know what my troubles were.
He offered me a cup of tea, but he didn't seem to mind when I told him I'd better get on back.
He gave me a solemn little smile and shook his head.
"How's the missus?" he said.
"Keeping all right?"
He always talked about Sall as if she were an invalid.
"Can't complain," I said.
"That's good." He gave me an odd, shy look.
"Still, if you don't mind me saying, you're looking a bit under the weather yourself."
"Oh, no," I said.
"I'm fine."
"Yes?"
"I'm a bit tired, I suppose," I said.
"It'll pass."
He nodded.
He was curious and, I think, genuinely concerned, but he knew not to pursue it.
"Well, I hope so," he said. "You take care of yourself.
You don't want to be coming down with something, right before Christmas."
I managed a smile.
"You can say that again," I said.
"Anyway, this is the last of it, before the holidays.
I'll get a good rest then.
You take care, too."
I shook his hand and got back into the rig.
For a moment, I wished I'd said yes to the tea and stopped, not to talk about anything in particular but to keep company with the man for a while.
I couldn't imagine that his Christmas would be that festive, with just him and the animals.
Then again, I couldn't imagine much of a Christmas for myself, now that everything was decided.
I wasn't looking forward to the quiet of the holidays, or having to go through the motions with Sall, which she would want to do, because - well, it was Christmas.
Maybe Caroline would ring, sometime in the middle of the afternoon, making the call first thing, so she could get on with the rest of the day knowing she'd done her duty.
I hadn't said anything to her about the cancer, of course.
I'd considered telling her the first time, but it would only have worried her, and then she might have felt duty-bound to come over.
This time, I didn't even give it a second thought, because I knew for sure that I was going to die, and I wanted to do it in my own way.
I wanted to let go of life with some kind of grace, or at least with some attention to what was happening, instead of just sitting quietly in the middle of some great drama between Sall and Caroline about what they thought I should do.
That was how it had been through so much of my life: I hadn't missed any of the big events, but, at the same time, I hadn't felt entirely present while they were happening.
Those last few weeks, though, I noticed everything.
Like the way time would catch up with me all of a sudden, and I'd see myself opening a letter, or making a cup of tea: see myself from above, doing these ordinary little things and taking an odd pleasure in them, though I can't say why.
I'd notice things out on the road, too, things I'd seen a thousand times before and had liked without knowing why.
Little details and imaginings I'd dismissed all my life as plain silliness suddenly became important.
Like that stretch of road on the way back from the Glasgow run, when I would pass the turnoff for Larbert.
I used to see it all the time: a blue road sign and a row of cherry-cola street lamps running off into the distance - Larbert, A9.
It was odd how much I liked that sign.
I'd never had reason to go to Larbert. We didn't do any runs in that direction, but maybe that was why I'd always liked the name.
Larbert.
It sounded like a place where the teen-age years went on forever, all gray days by the water and strange-tasting sweets that fizzed in your mouth, making you think of the possibility of sex.
Not that I had ever known much about sex as a teen-ager, other than what I saw in films and the oddly pleasurable discomfort I felt when Rita Compton visited my sister. That was the kind of stuff that was running through my head when I came across the boy, a few hundred yards into the woods, in the first of the heavy rain.
I was thirty miles from home when it started, a thick sleet that might turn to snow later, or might come to nothing; it was already dark enough for headlights, but as I came into the woods, passing under the beech trees, it was like entering a little theatre, the lights flickering across the darkness, the woods black and still, like a backdrop.
I'd always liked that about the woods, the way they suddenly closed in on me as if a story were about to be told.
Like when I was a boy, and the announcer on "Listen with Mother" would say, "Are you sitting comfortably? Then I'll begin."
Usually the road was empty, with maybe the odd set of headlamps - not a person, not even a car, just an effect of the light - streaming past in the opposite direction.
But that night the story contained another character, though he wasn't a character from any of the children's books I knew.
To begin with, I thought he was a woman.
Maybe I wouldn't have stopped if I'd known otherwise.
He certainly looked like a woman: a black dress, no coat, fish-net stockings, ankle boots, shoulder-length wavy hair.
She was walking slowly, toward the far end of that little avenue of beech trees, and I couldn't make out much, but when my lights picked her out she turned, and I saw that there was something odd about her, something heavy.
Not that I guessed right away that she was a boy.
It was dark and rainy, and then, when I saw her properly, I was distracted by the bruises on her face: the bruises, the mess her hair was in, the dark stain that might have been blood on her right leg, just below the hem of the dress.
I didn't pick up hitchhikers much. I did in the early days, and I'd enjoyed the chat most of the time.
Not always, but enough to make it worthwhile.
More recently, though, I'd preferred being alone in the cab.
Some nights, coming home in the dark, reeling off the narrow roads that ran to Perth or St. Andrews, remembering the way by my own landmarks - the hedges and drystone dykes and the spaces between them that other people didn't even notice, tight angles of holly or lamplight as I came through a town - I would realize, with a pleasant rush of surprise, that I was fond of myself as I was, fond of my life, and yet, at the same time, not that worried about having to let it go.
I had got past the stage when company seemed like a good thing on the road, and I have to admit that I thought about driving on that night, even after I'd noticed the gash on her leg.
I didn't need complications, and by then everything that wasn't part of the usual schedule had come to seem unnecessarily complicated.
Nevertheless, I made myself stop, and I pulled up alongside her - still thinking of this person on the road as a woman, possibly a woman in real difficulty - just to check, at least, that she was all right.
I rolled down the window and leaned across to the passenger side.
"You look like you ran into some trouble," I called out, trying to make myself heard above the engine and, at the same time, not to be so loud that I might frighten her.