Teacher Fei located the girl's blog without a problem. There were more pictures of her there, some with her mother.
Anyone could see the older woman's unease in front of the camera. In her prime she would have been more attractive than her daughter was now, but perhaps it was the diffidence in her face that had softened some of the features that in her daughter's case were accentuated by rage.
Under the heading "Happier Time," Teacher Fei found a black-and-white photo of the family. The girl, aged three or four, sat on a high stool, and her parents stood on either side.
On the wall behind them was a garden, painted by someone without much artistic taste, Teacher Fei could tell right away.
The girl laughed with a mouthful of teeth, and the mother smiled demurely, as a married woman would be expected to in front of a photographer.
The father was handsome, with perfectly shaped cheekbones and deep-set eyes not often found in a Chinese face, but the strain in his smile and the tiredness in those eyes seemed to indicate little of the happiness the daughter believed had existed in her parents' marriage.
Teacher Fei shook his head and scribbled on a scrap of paper the man's name and address and home phone number, as well as the address and number of his work unit, which had all been listed by the girl.
A scanned image of his resident's I.D. was displayed, too. Teacher Fei calculated the man's age, forty-six, and noted that on the paper.
When he went to the message board on the girl's Web site, Teacher Fei read a few of the most recent posts, left by sympathetic women claiming to have been similarly hurt by unfaithful husbands or absent fathers.
"Dearest Child," one message started, from a woman calling herself "Another Betrayed Wife," who praised the young girl as an angel of justice and courage.
Teacher Fei imagined these women dialling the father's number at night, or showing up in front of his work unit to brandish cardboard signs covered with words of condemnation.
"To all who support this young woman's mission," he typed in the box at the bottom of the Web page, "the world will be a better place when one learns to see through to the truth instead of making hasty and unfounded accusations."
"A Concerned Man," Teacher Fei signed his message.
A different opinion was not what these women would want to hear, but any man with a brain had to accept his responsibility to make the truth known.
A girl among the group of middle schoolers glanced at Teacher Fei and then whispered to a companion, who looked up at him with a snicker before letting herself be absorbed again by the screen.
An old man with wrinkles and without hair. Teacher Fei assessed himself through the girls' eyes: bored and boring, no doubt undesirable in any sense, but who could guarantee the girls that the flirtatious young man online who made their hearts speed was not being impersonated by an equally disgraceful old man?
Later that evening, when Teacher Fei had wrung a warm towel to the perfect stage of moistness and passed it to his mother, who sat on another towel on her bed, a curtain separating her partly undressed body from him, he thought about the two girls and their youthful indifference.
One day, if they were fortunate enough to survive all the disappointments life had in store for them, they would have to settle into their no longer young bodies.
"Do you remember Carpenter Chang?" Teacher Fei's mother asked from the other side of the curtain.
Three times a week, Mrs. Luo bathed Teacher Fei's mother, and on the other evenings Teacher Fei and his mother had to make do with the curtain as he assisted her with her sponge bath and listened to her reminisce about men and women long dead.
Half an hour, and sometimes an hour, would pass, his mother washing and talking on one side of the curtain, him listening and sometimes pressing for details on the other side.
This was the time of day they talked the most, when Teacher Fei knew that although his mother's body was frail and her mind tangled by memories, she was still the same graceful woman who, with her unhurried storytelling, knew how to take the awkwardness out of a situation in which she had to be cared for by a grown son who had remained a bachelor all his life.