Vigil
It was the Holy Night vigil, Wigilia, which means in Polish "to watch," as the Three Kings from Orient watched the rising of the Star, as the shepherds, gathered in the cold, watched and waited the birth of a babe in a manger, a birth from which the world and time would begin anew.
And I watched and waited too. 
My empty stocking dangled above the space heater from a clothesline shimmering with silver icicles. 
The colors of the bubble lights on our tree boiled across the steamy windowpanes, while outside, a snowfall that seemed conjured up by my father's spirited reading of "The Night Before Christmas" settled on a deserted 18th Street. 
I was in my flannel pajamas, ready for bed, when a knock came at the door. 
Although our holiday decorations included an extra plate set at the straw-strewn dining-room table for any stranger who might arrive, my parents weren't expecting company. 
My father glanced at my mother and shrugged, but for once he didn't ask who before unchaining the safety latch.
The door opened on the bespectacled face of the grizzled, spooky old Bohemian from the taxidermy shop downstairs. 
He stood cradling what looked to be an enormous, misshapen gift. 
It was wrapped in newspaper bound with green plastic clothesline, and my father's first instinct was to politely refuse it.
"Stashu, tell him to come in and have some eggnog," my mother said.
But the old Bohemian wouldn't step from the hall. 
He hadn't come to disturb us with a visit, only to deliver his package, which he finally managed to press into my father's arms.
Pan, come in and join us and break oplatki for health in the new year," my mother called.
Traditionally on Wigilia, a white wafer of oplatki was passed around the table, as we had earlier that evening, and each person broke off a piece and made a wish for the coming year. 
Oplatki - Angel Bread - melted like a wheaty snowflake on the tongue. 
I was told it tasted like the Host did at Mass, something I was too young to know, as I was still a year away from my First Communion. 
My mother always addressed the old man as Pan - "Mister," in Polish. 
I don't think she knew his name. 
His taxidermy shop was nameless too. 
Earlier that day, when she'd taken me with her to drop off a paper plate of Russian tea balls at his shop because he was alone at Christmas, I'd told her that kids said he'd escaped from the booby hatch.
"He came from the Old Country during the War," my mother said. "He came alone because they left him nothing. 
We can't imagine what he's lived through. 
Never forget how blessed we are."
Now that he'd delivered the gift he'd lugged up four dim-lit flights of stairs, the old man refused any further obligation. 
"No, no, enough, Missus, dekuji, dekuji," he said, bowing with thanks while edging away from our door.
My parents bowed back, wishing him Wesolych Swiat, and he wished us Merry Christmas in Czech in return. 
His spectacles flashed a last gleam before he disappeared into the cavernous hallway.
My father shouldered the door shut and carried the gift to our kitchen table. 
"Oh my God," my mother said.
She snipped the knotted line with her sewing shears and they began to unwrap the newspaper. 
The top sheets peeled off easily, but each layer of newspaper was increasingly damp. 
When the wet, pulpy sheets shredded in his hands, my father resorted to the spatula he used for flipping pancakes. 