UNEXPECTANCIES
Diane, I remember after that really bad break-up of mine - the kind that doesn't seem so long ago but is? - you were the one who pulled me out of my hall closet where I tried to hide from the pain, me there alone with the broom and the dustpan.
Later, when I moved to the much-smaller studio apartment where I live now, you were the one who unpacked my clothes.
Here, years later, the places where you first put the folded sweaters and jeans remain the same.
And the day my doctor told me there would be no children for me, you were the one who met me at Starbucks and sat quietly as I cried into my latte.
But, Diane, I remember the good times too.
You taught me how, as an adult, to ride a bike - as a child, I'd never really learned.
And I never really had a best friend then, just a shadowy girl I'd met in kindergarten who followed me around through grade school, avoiding, as I did, games the other kids played during recess.
Diane, you told me most earnestly that you had no intention of ever having a child; that you loved your life the way it was.
You made it OK for me to love my life just the way it was, too.
And then, not long after that, you told me you were "accidentally pregnant".
I don't remember if I said the right things, or made promises to always be there for you; if I let you keep drinking your wine or if I stopped you by putting my hand on yours, saying, "The baby...".
When I go to my own doctor not long after, the news for me is also unexpected.
As she moves the scope around, a frown creases her forehead. She declares, "Bonnie, you have a fibroid," and a few minutes later she presses a grainy black-and-white picture into my hand.
I take it home and stuff it into the far back of the junk drawer in my kitchen.
I stop by your house the next day and notice you have your sonogram baby-image on your fridge.
I can't bring myself to tell you my fibroid news. You explain how you and the father will be moving in together.
You shrug and say it's really for the best since the baby will be here so soon.
You rattle off a slew of plans.
The look on your face is something I do not understand: contentment.
It builds a wall between us, brick by brick.
Back at home that evening, I pull out my own crumpled scan. Smoothing it down, I look at it critically.
The fibroid is roughly the size of a quarter.
I hold it up against my fridge and firmly press a magnet to it.
There. We both have alien beings growing in our bodies.
Yours moves you forward to a burgeoning new life, but I don't know how to share the news with you or anyone about my fibroid.
We do bike together that weekend, Diane, remember?
One of our most-favorite activities.
But on this day I realize it will be our last ride for a long, long time.
When we do talk that afternoon, everything seems to be about plans for the baby.
I feel guilty even thinking about anything else while in your presence.
I wish for the ride to be over before it even starts.
And, needless to say, I still don't tell you about the fibroid.