The Region of Unlikeness
Some people would consider Jacob a physicist, some would consider him a philosopher or simply a "time expert," though I tend to think of him in less reverent terms.
But not terms of hatred.
Ilan used to call Jacob "my cousin from Outer Swabia."
That obscure little joke, which I heard Ilan make a number of times, probably without realizing how many times he'd made it before, always seemed to me to imply a distant blood relation between the two of them.
I guess I had the sense (back then) that Jacob and Ilan were shirttail cousins of some kind.
But later I came to believe, at least intermittently, that actually Ilan's little phrase was both a misdirection and a sort of clue, one that hinted at an enormous secret that they'd never let me in on.
Not a dully personal secret, like an affair or a small crime or, say, a missing testicle- but a scientific secret, that rare kind of secret that, in our current age, still manages to bend our knee.
I met Ilan and Jacob by chance.
Sitting at the table next to mine in a small Moroccan coffee shop on the Upper West Side, they were discussing "Wuthering Heights," too loudly, having the kind of reference-laden conversation that unfortunately never fails to attract me.
Jacob looked about forty-five; he was overweight, he was munching obsessively on these unappetizing green leaf-shaped cookies, and he kept saying "obviously."
Ilan was good-looking, and he said that the tragedy of Heathcliff was that he was essentially, on account of his lack of property rights, a woman.
Jacob then extolled Catherine's proclaiming, "I am Heathcliff." Something about passion was said. And about digging up graves.
And a bearded young man next to them moved to a more distant table.
Jacob and Ilan talked on, unoffended, praising Bront, and at some point Ilan added, "But since Jane Austen's usually the token woman on university syllabi, it's understandable if your average undergraduate has a hard time shaking the idea that women are half-wits, moved only by the terror that a man might not be as rich as he seems."
Not necessarily warmly, I chimed in with something.
Ilan laughed.
Jacob refined Ilan's statement to "straight women." Then to straight women "in the Western tradition."
Then the three of us spoke for a long time.
That hadn't been my intention.
But there was something about Ilan- manic, fragile, fidgety, womanizing (I imagined) Ilan- that was all at once like fancy coffee and bright-colored smutty flyers.
He had a great deal to say, with a steady gaze into my eyes, about my reading the New York Post, which he interpreted as a sign of a highly satiric yet demotically moral intelligence.
Jacob nodded.
I let the flattery go straight to my heart, despite the fact that I didn't read the Post- it had simply been left on my table by a previous customer.
Ilan called Post writers naive Nabokovs.
Yes, I said.
The headline, I remember, read "AXIS OF WEASEL.
Somehow this led to Jacob's saying something vague about Proust, and violence, and perception.
"Jacob's a boor, isn't he?" Ilan said.
Or maybe he said "bore" and I heard "boor" because Ilan's way of talking seemed so antiquated to me.
I had so few operating sources of pride at that time.
I was tutoring and making my lonely way through graduate school in civil engineering, where my main sense of joy came from trying to silently outdo the boys- they still played video games- in my courses.
I started going to that coffee shop every day.
Everyone I knew seemed to find my new companions arrogant and pathetic, but whenever they called me I ran to join them.
Ilan and Jacob were both at least twenty years older than me, and they called themselves philosophers, although only Jacob seemed to have an actual academic position, and maybe a tenuous one, I couldn't quite tell.
I was happy not to care about those things.
Jacob had a wife and daughter, too, though I never met them.
It was always just the three of us.
We would get together and Ilan would go on about Heidegger and "thrownness," or about Will Ferrell, and Jacob would come up with some way to disagree, and I would mostly just listen, and eat baklava and drink lots of coffee.
Then we'd go for a long walk, and Ilan might have some argument in defense of, say, Fascist architecture, and Jacob would say something about the striated and the smooth, and then a pretty girl would walk by and they would talk about her outfit for a long time.
Jacob and Ilan always had something to say, which gave me the mistaken impression that I did, too.
Evenings, we'd go to the movies, or eat at an overpriced restaurant, or lie around Ilan's spacious and oddly neglected apartment.
He had no bed frame, nothing hung on the walls, and in his bathroom there was just a single white towel and a T.W.A. mini-toothbrush.
But he had a two-hundred-dollar pair of leather gloves.
One day, when I went shopping with the two of them, I found myself buying a simple striped sweater so expensive that I couldn't get to sleep that night.
None of this behavior- the laziness, the happiness, the subservience, even the pretentiousness- was "like me."
I was accustomed to using a day planner and eating my lunch alone, in fifteen minutes; I bought my socks at street fairs.
But when I was with them I felt like, well, a girl. Or "the girl."
I would see us from the outside and recognize that I was, in an old-fashioned and maybe even demeaning way, the sidekick, the mascot, the decoration; it was thrilling.
And it didn't hurt that Ilan was so generous with his praise.
I fixed his leaking shower and he declared me a genius.
Same when I roasted a chicken with lemons.
When I wore orange socks with jeans, he kissed my feet.
Jacob told Ilan to behave with more dignity; he was just jealous of Ilan's easy pleasures.
It's not as if Jacob wasn't lovable in his own abstruse and awkward way.
I admired how much he read- probably more than Ilan, certainly more than me (he made this as clear as he could)- but Jacob struck me as pedantic, and I thought he would do well to button his shirts a couple buttons higher.
Once, we were all at the movies- I had bought a soda for four dollars- and Jacob and I were waiting wordlessly for Ilan to return from the men's room.
It felt like a very long wait.
Several times I had to switch the hand I was holding the soda in because the waxy cup was so cold.
"He's taking such a long time," I said, and shrugged my shoulders, just to throw a ripple into the strange quiet between us.
"You know what they say about time," Jacob said idly.
"It's what happens even when nothing else does."
"O.K.," I said.
The only thing that came to my mind was the old joke that time flies like an arrow and fruit flies like a banana.
I couldn't bear to say it, so I remained silent.
It was as if, without Ilan, we couldn't even pretend to have a conversation.
There were, I should admit, things about Ilan (in particular) that didn't make me feel so good about myself.
For example, once I thought he was pointing a gun at me, but it turned out to be a remarkably good fake.
Occasionally when he poured me a drink he would claim he was trying to poison me.
One night I even became very sick, and wondered.
Another evening- maybe the only time Jacob wasn't with us; he said his daughter had appendicitis- Ilan and I lay on his mattress watching TV.
For years, watching TV had made me sick with a sense of dissoluteness, but now suddenly it seemed great.
That night, Ilan took hold of one of my hands and started idly to kiss my fingers, and I felt- well, I felt I'd give up the rest of my life just for that.
Then Ilan got up and turned off the television. Then he fell asleep, and the hand-kissing never came up again.
Ilan frequently called me his "dusty librarian."
And once he called me his "Inner Swabian," and this struck him as very funny, and even Jacob didn't seem to understand why.
Ilan made a lot of jokes that I didn't understand- he was a big fan of Poe, so I chalked his occasionally morbid humor up to that.
But he had that handsome face, and his pants fit him just so, and he liked to lecture Jacob about how smart I was after I'd, say, nervously folded up my napkin in a way he found charming.
I got absolutely no work done while I was friends with them.
And hardly any reading, either.
What I mean to say is that those were the happiest days of my entire life.
Then we fell apart.
I just stopped hearing from them.
Ilan didn't return my calls.
I waited and waited, but I was remarkably poised about the whole thing.
I assumed that Ilan had simply found a replacement mascot.
And I imagined that Jacob- in love with Ilan, in his way- hardly registered the swapping out of one girl for another.
Suddenly it seemed a mystery to me that I had ever wanted to be with them.
Ilan was just a charming parrot.
And Jacob the parrot's parrot.
And if Jacob was married and had a child wasn't it time for him to grow up and spend his days like a responsible adult?
That, anyway, was the disorganized crowd of my thoughts.
Several months passed, and I almost convinced myself that I was glad to be alone again.
I took on more tutoring work.
Then one day I ran randomly (O.K., not so randomly- I was haunting our old spots like the most unredeemed of ghosts) into Jacob.
For the duration of two iced teas, Jacob sat with me, repeatedly noting that, sadly, he really had no time at all, he really would have to be going.
We chatted about this and that and about the tasteless yet uncanny ad campaign for a B movie called "Silent Hill" (the poster image was of a child normal in all respects except for the absence of a mouth), and Jacob went on and on about how much some prominent philosopher adored him, and about how deeply unmutual the feeling was, and about the burden of unsolicited love, until finally, my heart a hummingbird, I asked, "And how is Ilan?"
Jacob's face went the proverbial white.
I don't think I'd ever actually seen that happen to anyone.
"I'm not supposed to tell you," he said.
Not saying anything seemed my best hope for remaining composed; I sipped at my tea.
"I don't want your feelings to be hurt," Jacob went on. "I'm sure Ilan wouldn't have wanted them hurt, either."
After a long pause, I said, "Jacob, I really am just a dusty librarian, not some disastrous heroine."
It was a bad imitation of something Ilan might have said with grace.
"Just tell me."
"Well, let's see.
He died."
"What?"
"He had, well, so it is, well, he had stomach cancer.
Inoperable, obviously.
He kept it a secret.
Told only family."
I recalled the cousin from Outer Swabia line.
Also, I felt certain- somehow really certain- that I was being lied to.
"He isn't dead," I said, trying to deny the creeping sense of humiliation gathering at my liver's portal vein.