Three Short Moments in a Long Life
THE SPY
Beverly and I were second graders at New Carew Street School and we both hated recess.
She hated recess and she cried the whole time and nobody knew why, so everybody made fun of her.
I hated recess because it wasn't really school and we weren't learning anything. It was a waste of time.
I knew Beverly only by name and by what I could tell from spying on her.
Her last name was LaPlante, which was strange and therefore wrong, and she was known for being a crybaby.
She was not even pretty. Her crying all the time frightened me, so I never spoke to her.
Besides, I didn't want anybody to think I was her friend. She didn't belong.
And, secretly, I feared that I didn't belong, either.
The nice thing about Beverly LaPlante was that she disappeared sometime that winter.
One day, Miss Williams was taking attendance and, after a little pause, she skipped over Beverly's name.
We all looked at where Beverly was supposed to be sitting, and her seat was empty.
I remember thinking, Yes, good, she didn't belong and now she's gone.
I wondered if she was crying in her new place, wherever that was.
I wondered how she had managed to disappear or if it was something that her mother and father had done to her.
I wondered, for the first time, why she cried.
Second grade came to a dull close without any further thought about Beverly LaPlante.
Third grade started with a bang. We had a new teacher, Miss Connolly, who loved me because I was smart and clean, and I loved her back because she was beautiful.
At dinner one night, my mother said to my father, "She's very nice, but, dear God, those teeth!"
"What's with her teeth?" my father said.
"She's got buck teeth. Like a horse."
It was only conversation, but it wasn't nice to Miss Connolly, so I hated them both until I went to bed.
We had a new reading textbook, a thick one with a brown-and-orange cover, and during recess I hid in the bathroom and read ahead.
On my third day of hiding in the bathroom, the janitor caught me and told Miss Connolly, who gave me a lecture about good citizenship.
She didn't look beautiful then. She looked like an angry horse, and that made me cry.
She gave me a hug and told me that she understood but I couldn't skip recess anymore. I had to do what everybody else did.
So I promised. But I still read ahead in the brown-and-orange book.
In third grade, we played dodgeball during recess.
I liked dodgeball, because I was good at it.
I was skinny and quick and I could see, ahead of time, where someone was going to throw the ball and I'd get out of the way, so the ball would hit someone else, someone who was fat or slow.
My friend Billy Muir was fat and slow, but he was an exception. He managed to avoid getting hit most of the time.
Billy Muir's father always wore a suit. He was successful in business, so he was transferred to the Chicago branch of his company, where he continued to be successful until his supervisors discovered that he was embezzling money and he hanged himself. With his belt.
That was later. In third grade, Billy Muir had no idea that his father would end up famous.
Billy was fat and slow but he could dodge the ball anyway, so that was something to think about.
But the big thing to think about was the new girl. Her name was Beverly, just like the LaPlante girl who had disappeared the winter before, but this new Beverly was pretty and she laughed all the time.
I was the best in the class at dodgeball, but on the day the new girl arrived I was the first one out, which made me miserable.
It was fair, but it was wrong, because I wasn't paying attention and the ball hit me while I was thinking about the "Little Mermaid" story I was reading.
By Hans Christian Andersen, with an "e" instead of an "o." Now that I was out, I began to pay attention to the game.
Standing at the edge of the circle, I could get a good look at everybody, and that was when I recognized the new girl.
Her hair was short now and she was a different Beverly LaPlante, but she was Beverly LaPlante all the same.
How was this possible?
She was wearing a Girl Scout outfit with clumsy Girl Scout shoes. She was talking and laughing and making noise, and, when Billy Muir got hit and had to go outside the circle, she noticed the angry face he made and she said, "Jesus Christ! Your face would sour the milk!"
Nobody seemed to hear her, but I did and I looked at Miss Connolly, who made a horse face, which meant that she had heard her, too. But she didn't say anything.
Taking the Lord's name in vain was wrong and therefore Miss Connolly was wrong to pretend she hadn't heard.
But then Joycie Adams got hit by the ball and just stood there like a dummy until everyone yelled at her that she had to leave the circle.
She said that it wasn't fair, because the ball had barely hit her, and Beverly said, "What the hell! Don't be such a damn crybaby."
Everybody heard her this time and turned toward Miss Connolly, who finally said, "Now, now! Language, please!"
The kids all went quiet, waiting to see what would happen, but Beverly laughed into the silence and said, "Shit, piss, fuck!"
Miss Connolly said very loudly, "Time for class, people! Everybody to the stairs now. Now! Not tomorrow!"
She said "people" in that special voice, so we all ran to the front stairs and waited.
Miss Connolly took Beverly aside and we couldn't hear what she said, but Beverly just laughed again and said something back.
Miss Connolly took Beverly's arm and shook it hard, but Beverly pulled away and ran to the center of the dodgeball circle, where she did a little dance in her Girl Scout shoes, shouting over and over, "Jesus Christ and shit, piss, fuck! Jesus Christ and shit, piss, fuck!"
She shouted as if she had finally discovered the truth and couldn't wait to tell the world.
Miss Connolly herded us up the stairs and into the classroom, where she gave us silent reading time until lunch period.
I tried to figure out what had happened at recess, but it just made my head hurt.
The bad words were wrong, of course, and taking the Lord's name in vain was wrong, but it was more complicated than that.
It was something about Beverly herself. I wondered what had happened to her that made her happy now, but with dirty words, when a year ago she had just cried all the time.
She wasn't like any of us. She didn't belong. She didn't fit in.
I tried all the time to fit in and no one noticed that I didn't, but now I wondered, secretly, if I was like Beverly LaPlante.
I began to think of her when I was supposed to be doing arithmetic and geography, which were no fun anyway. I began to think of her on the walk to school each day and again on the walk home.
Then, one night, when I said my prayers before bed, I finished up with the sign of the cross and, trying not to say it, I said, "Please, God, let Beverly LaPlante die."
It was a real prayer and I knew it was wrong and I would go to Hell.
I said, "I take it back," but you can't take back prayers.
I said a lot of Our Fathers and after a while I felt that maybe I wouldn't go to Hell and I should stop thinking about Beverly.
She was just one of the things I was afraid of.
I wasn't sure what all the others were, but I knew for certain that I was afraid of Beverly LaPlante.
Beverly died that summer, of polio.
My mother said, "No more swimming at the pond. That's how you get polio. That's how your little friend died, the LaPlante girl, swimming in the pond."
So I didn't swim that summer, but I knew then that I would have Beverly LaPlante stuck in my mind forever.
In fourth grade, everything was different.
There were new people, and some of the old people were gone.
I began to understand that people disappeared and changed and sometimes they hanged themselves or came back different and still didn't fit in. People were a mystery, I decided, like the Resurrection at Sunday school. Jesus died and was buried and then he rose from the dead. He said hello to Mary Magdalene- she was the first to see him, because she had washed his feet and dried them with her hair- and later he made breakfast for his disciples to prove that he had died and then come back real.
There was no crying involved with Jesus. And no dirty words. Then he disappeared for good, just like Beverly LaPlante.
THE WRITER
I was working on my novel- don't even ask- when I heard the doorbell ring.
My wife was out teaching school, so I had to answer it myself.
I got up from my computer, went downstairs slowly, because I'd turned my ankle a few days earlier, and just as I got to the door I tripped on the new carpet and heard myself saying, "Jesus Christ!"
I opened the door and it was him.
"Hey," he said.
"Hey," I said.
I recognized him immediately from his pictures.
He had long blond hair and those eyes that follow you around the room.
My head had been bothering me lately.
I figured it was the asthma medications I was taking, but I couldn't believe that they were powerful enough to conjure up a lithograph Jesus at my front door.
I'd been meaning for some time to read one of the Gospels straight through, to get the story directly from the approved source, so maybe that was it.
He was always on my mind these days, and now he was standing on my porch.
"Right," he said.
"In five years, I see myself with the same job title, about the same salary, and significantly more responsibilities."
At first I was awestruck, but after a minute I got over the blond hair and the eyes and I could see that he was nothing special, just another guy trying to get along.
Maybe he was a vet.
Iraq?
Afghanistan?
Anyway, he had on grungy jeans and an orange sweatshirt, and he could have used a shower.
"How's it going?" he said.
I was tempted to tell him how it was going.
I had written all these books and nobody gave a shit and I was in the middle of another one that nobody would give a shit about, either.
My subject this time, if novels can be said to have a subject, was guilt.
It was the story of a high-school teacher who was guilty of lots of things- infidelity, verbal cruelty, petty theft, the usual lying and cheating- but he was not guilty of molesting one of his students, and that was what he was accused of.
I was trying to use this poor chump to explore the infinite varieties of guilt and justice and injustice.
When the doorbell rang, I was working on a scene in which a harmless conversation between this teacher and a student was overheard by another teacher, a troublemaker, who would later testify that he had witnessed what sounded like a seduction.