The Clean War
"AMI, have you found any nearby friendly structures that are still operational?" Sarah Bennett whispered.
She swallowed hard, trying to hold down the mounting panic that threatened to jump out of her throat.
I'm not a soldier. I'm just a woman who programs computers.
I don't know what I'm doing. This was a mistake!
The Autonomous Military Intelligence's voice, calm and androgynous, spoke in her ear. "There is a repair depot about one kilometer to the north.
It appears intact, but it is highly unlikely that it has not been compromised. I urge caution in approach."
Silently, AMI overlaid a map of the surrounding region onto Sarah's helmet's HUD.
The bright lines of the map provided some relief against the dark, dense jungle lit only by dim starlight.
Her location was marked by a blinking dot in the midst of the neon shapes that represented the hills around her.
The repair depot appeared as a green square at the other end of the valley.
"Thank you.
I guess that's the best we can do," Sarah said.
For a moment, she was surprised by the calmness in AMI's voice, but then she mentally laughed at herself.
Of course an artificial intelligence cannot feel fear.
She was an engineer, and she knew better than anyone not to confuse the illusion of sentience for the real thing.
Her temporary lapse was a reflection of how much stress she was under.
She glanced at the alien sky behind her.
The dying embers of the space battle from a few hours ago shimmered like the aurora borealis back on Earth.
Fifty of the best robotic ships human engineering could deliver had been annihilated within ten minutes by the enemy.
But she had expected that.
The entire purpose of the drones had been to provide a distraction so as to allow Sarah's tiny stealth ship to slip in through the gap in the defense and land on Alara, so that the real mission could begin.
"I have not detected any surface enemy activity near here," AMI continued, smooth as ever. "But there is a lot of radio chatter.
I cannot decipher any of it."
The air was humid and hot. Sarah was already sweating in her light camouflage suit and body armor, which also contained the housing for AMI.
Above her, stars twinkled in unfamiliar constellations.
She wondered briefly which was the Sun and thought of Tobias's warm lips and Tara's soapy, milky smell, hundreds of light-years away.
Her eyes went blurry for a moment.
She shook her head, took a deep breath, and unexpectedly, felt the panic subside.
Thinking of Tobias and Tara reminded her of why she had been sent on this mission.
Billions are counting on me. Especially those two.
And Sarah began to move, following AMI's glowing map.
On Alara, evolution never developed wood or any other similar kind of compression-resistant organic composite that would make tall trees possible.
Instead, the plants struggled near the ground, piling on top of each other, choking each other from sunlight.
The tallest plants, swirls of great sword-shaped leaves that shot straight out of the ground, did not exceed three meters in height.
Hiking through this dense jungle was akin to bushwhacking through the wild cane fields of Sarah's childhood home in Java.
"Do you have a plan of attack that I should prepare for?" AMI asked.
"I'll have to improvise," Sarah said, her breath heavy with exertion. "But I must figure out what happened to our machines."
Sixty years ago, when the first robotic exploratory probe, the Columbia, jumped through a wormhole and arrived at Alara, the planet had appeared to be paradise.
Taking advantage of the wormhole, a ship that never exceeded the speed of light could go from Earth to Alara in a little more than ten years.
It had the right gravity, magnetic field, and atmosphere to support human habitation, and there did not appear to be any intelligent life that would stand in the way of colonization.
But before the first colony ship could be prepared, the Columbia went silent.
Its final transmissions through the wormhole showed menacing, metallic shapes approaching through the fog.
The probe fired warning shots at them and then, darkness.
These last transmissions were scrutinized to extract every last bit of information.
The final conclusion was that the Columbia's attackers were alien machines.
No other evidence of advanced technological civilization was found on Alara, which meant that the machines had come from elsewhere.
The machines did not contain organic pilots, and there was no reason to believe that aliens had discovered how to break the laws of physics to remotely operate the machines through faster-than-light transmission of signals.
The improbable yet logical conclusion was that we had encountered the robotic probes of another starfaring civilization.
Someone else also wanted Alara and was willing to fight us for it.
But popular opinion on Earth made the loss of human life in a war of colonial conquest unacceptable.
The war had to be fought with no loss of human life, a Clean War.
"We are too civilized to die," as the president put it.
A new robotic transport ship was thus prepared, and it carried to Alara the best military drones that Earth had.
Adapted from the smart drones that had allowed Earth's advanced nations to win wars for decades with zero casualties, the drones in this Second Assault were programmed to attack any alien robots they encountered with overwhelming force.
They were fast, adaptable, and could modify their own routines in response to new conditions.
But the enemy- the unseen alien masters of the hostile robots- proved to be superior technologists.
The robots of the Second Assault found an Alara filled with alien war machines.
Footage from the Second Assault showed Earth machines being outwitted and outgunned, defeated by the coordinated and flexible tactics of the alien robots.
Fear that the enemy would eventually discover the path through the wormhole and attack Earth itself gripped the world.
Roboticists, AI researchers, weapons experts, and military strategists worked feverishly to design Earth's next response, the Third Assault.
Sarah Bennett, one of the most brilliant roboticists of her generation, analyzed the data from the Second Assault and discovered a critical weakness in the enemy: the alien robots were overly conservative in their tactics.
The alien robots preferred ambushes to direct engagement and appeared to favor disabling Earth machines to destroying them.
Indeed, some footage showed the alien robots attempting to repair disabled Earth machines.
Perhaps the enemy programmed the robots this way so that they could study our technology and discover our weaknesses.
"The programming of our military AIs has been limited by the blind spots of an older generation whose instincts date from when wars were still fought by people," Sarah wrote in her report.
"Robots are not human soldiers, and the ethical considerations against suicide tactics do not apply.
The tactics may be dirty, but this will still be the Clean War."
The machines of the Third Assault were the smartest, most clever war machines ever designed.
They incorporated Sarah's new programming.
After securing initial bases on Alara's surface, autonomous factories churned out drones which engaged enemy robots, allowed themselves to be disabled, only to self-destruct once they had been transported to enemy bases, causing maximal damage.
But Earth's celebration of these victories was short-lived.
Just as the Third Assault seemed close to eliminating all enemy presence on Alara, all of the Earth robots suddenly stopped transmitting.
Had the enemy finally discovered a way to interfere with the code in our war machines?
A real, flesh-and-blood roboticist, a creative intelligence unbound by programmed limitations, had to be sent to investigate.
The generals evaluated millions of candidates with the help of strategic AIs, and they always arrived at the same conclusion: as the chief designer of the military AIs, Sarah was the most logical and efficient choice for the mission.
"Even one life lost might be one life too many," the president said.
He shuddered at the thought of his poll numbers.
"The escort drones will be able to buy the researcher only a very brief period of time to investigate how our machines were disabled," Sarah said. "We must send someone who has the expertise to figure out the answer as quickly as possible before. . .being overcome.
That means me."
The president nodded sagely.
He had just realized that it would take more than a decade before anyone on Earth would learn of Sarah's fate. The poll numbers that would be affected wouldn't be his.
"If we don't defeat them, eventually they'll come to us, to our home," Sarah said to Tobias. She avoided looking at his face.
Tobias said nothing.
But his body shook with the effort of not moving, of holding back his angry words.
The tiny figure of Tara was asleep in his arms.
"I have to go so that our daughter will have a future among the stars," Sarah said.
She turned away and rushed out of the house.
She did not start to cry until she was halfway to the launch pad.
The irony that the Clean War's fiercest advocate might end up as its first casualty did not escape her.
Sarah was glad to finally emerge from the dense jungle and step onto the clear, flat ground around the repair depot.
The fact that the clearing had been maintained free of vegetation was promising.
Perhaps against the odds, the Earth drones had managed to stave off enemy robots within this depot and had only been prevented from contacting home.
Cautiously, she made her way towards the building through the mist that made everything more than a few meters away invisible.
AMI updated Sarah's HUD to outline the locations of doors.
A hundred paces or so later, they arrived at one of the entrances.
Plugging in a hardwire link to avoid any radio leakage, Sarah had AMI transmit the right encryption codes, and the door wooshed open.
As soon as she stepped through, the door closed behind her, and she was plunged into complete darkness.
"I do not know if any of the machines are operational," AMI said.
Taking a deep breath, Sarah turned on the floodlights over her helmet, revealing eight hulking war machines scattered randomly over the depot floor, their motionless seven-foot carbon steel bodies like mini tanks with guns pointing in all directions.
She walked up to the nearest one and plugged her com-link in.
"Override achieved," AMI said.
Cascading diagnostic information flooded her HUD.
"AMI, copy the memory image into a sandbox and begin disassembly."
"Should I transmit a copy of the memory image to Earth?"
"Not yet."
It still wasn't safe to break radio silence and reveal their presence.
Sarah watched the lines and lines of disassembled code scroll before her on the HUD. She had to wait until it was complete to run her analysis.
"AMI, what time is it in Washington, D.C.?"
After a second, AMI replied, "I am unable to supply that information."
Sarah sighed.
AMI couldn't make the calculations because all the drones and AIs sent on this mission had been scrubbed of all information concerning the location of Earth in order to prevent it from falling into enemy hands.
I'll just pretend it's nighttime.
Sarah imagined Tobias now setting Tara down in her crib, tucking the blanket over their daughter and singing her to sleep.
He had a wonderful voice, no matter what he sang.
But she knew the image was wrong.
More than ten years had passed on Earth as she traveled here, asleep in a bubble of time inside the wormhole.
Tara was now almost a teenager, and Sarah had missed the entirety of her childhood.
"Disassembly complete."
AMI's voice recalled her to the task at hand.
Sarah set to work, running the code through heuristic filters, generating call-graphs, tracking the history of self-modifications.
She had tweaked these AI routines for many sleepless nights and knew them as intimately as any of her tattoos.