The Love Game
When marimba rhythms start to play
Dance with me, make me sway
Like a lazy ocean hugs the shore
Hold me close, sway me more
Like a flower bending in the breeze
Bend with me, sway with ease
When we dance you have a way with me
Stay with me, sway with me
Other dancers may be on the floor
Dear, but my eyes will see only you
Only you have the magic technique
When we sway I go weak
I can hear the sounds of violins
Long before it begins
Make me thrill as only you know how
Sway me smooth, sway me now
Light breeze drifted through a little patch of trees.
Morning sunshine splattered through the evergreen leaves and branches, falling onto a cluster of viburnum that was growing under the tree.
A little bell shaped flower dangled in the winds, nodding from the tip of a hollow scape that stands just about the threadlike leaves.
It had six snow-white petals, each with a small emerald green spot near its tip.
A young man walked into the forest, enjoying the early morning freshness of the air.
His eyes lighted up when he spotted the little flower.
"Awww, a little snowflake.
Haven't you opened a little early this year?
See your friends are still not here yet."
He sat down beside the snowflake, took out a flute and started to play.
Every morning, he came to play his flute beside the little snowflake.
Every morning, the little snowflake danced with the soft and fluent music that flew around the forest.
One day, while he was playing the flute, he heard a light laugh.
He turned around, and saw her, white dress, black hair, with an emerald green ribbon on her hair.
"Who are you?" "I live in this forest.
I like your flute so much.
Can you play it for me one more time?"
He played, and she danced with the music.
And then she ran away, laughing.
The forest became quiet again, like nothing had happened.
He rubbed his eyes, and tried to search the depths of the forest, but he couldn't find any trace of her.
The next morning, he came and played his flute. And she came again, laughing and dancing.
The snowflake flowers had now bloomed, like little white stars in a green sky, stopping every pair of eyes of people who happened to pass by.
Many fresh mornings passed, she danced to his music and laughed with him.
But every time when he tried to catch her hands, she fled and disappeared into the forest.
One day, he didn't come.
Then the next day, he didn't come.
The early summer was hot and dry.
There hadn't been a rainfall for many many days.
White snowflake petals shed to the ground, and became brown.
"What happened?
What can I do?"
She asked.
"I want to become a human like him."
"Human life is very short, snowflake.
The flower spirits don't die."
A voice answered.
"I don't care.
I want to be like him.
I want to be with him."
"Sigh.
If he loves you, when he kisses you, you'll be turned into a real woman.
But you'll never be able to turn back to your original shape, and you'll never be able to come back to us, you understand?"
"Yes!
I understand."
A big smile blossomed at the corners of her dry lips.
He finally came.
A little water can was in his hand.
"This summer must be hard for you, little snowflake."
He murmured when he poured water to the root of the plant.
Snowflake's heart was so full, and so sweet.
"Play your flute for me, please."
She whispered into the wind.
"Wow, such beautiful flowers!"
A soft girl's voice sounded behind the young man.
He turned to her and smiled.
"Yes, they are pretty, aren't they?
I used to come here and play my flute everyday.
There is a girl live in this forest too.
I used to think she is a fairy."
He said dreamingly.
"Come on, let's go.
We are almost late for the flight."
"Wait a second.
I want to play my flute one last time.
And I'll introduce you to her if she comes. I want to say goodbye to her."
He raised the flute to his mouth.
Soft music flew around the trees.
But she didn't come.
He finished his music, sighed.
He knelt down beside the snowflake, gently touched the snow-white petal.
"Good bye little snowflake."
A drop of water rolled out off the snowflake petal, into his hand.
He suddenly felt dizzy.
He saw the girl again, white dress, black hair, with a green ribbon on her hair.
She slowly rose up from the snowflake flower, wrapped her arms around him, and pressed her lips on his.
He felt like a static shock on his lips, and through his body.
And he suddenly woke up. He stood up and looked around.
The forest was quiet as before except for the light breeze blew through the trees.
He opened his hand.
A snowflake petal lay inside.
It was as white as snow, with a small emerald green spot near its tip. Like a teardrop.
A gust of wind swirled around with scattered snow-white flower petals.
A dimly lighted phrase showed up in the middle of the snowflake background: "Sorry, you lost."
Flinging open the cover, the girl stood up from her seat drearily and walked toward the game master desk.
She handed her game piece card to the GM and said simply, "I'd like to play another game please."
The GM inserted her GP card into the GP reader, and then handed it back to her.
Another one hooked up hopelessly, he sighed to himself.
Fly me to the moon
Let me sing among those stars
Let me see what spring is like  On Jupiter and Mars
In other words, hold my hand
In other words, baby kiss me
Fill my heart with song
Let me sing for ever more
You are all I long for
All I worship and adore
In other words, please be true
In other words, I love you
It had been seven days now since she ran out of the Hive after him.
She still remembered their brief conversation before he left.
"You finally did the most honorable thing."
She said quietly.
"You understand what I did and why, then?" He looked at her.
"Yes I do understand.
You have tried to do all you can for what you believe to be the right thing to do."
She tried to remain as composed as she could.
"You want me to go with you?"
"It's up to you.
I couldn't possibly love you any more, but I'd catch you when you jumped, and hold your hand afterwards."
He paused, and then added, "There's not much else I can offer."
Her heart still pained at the coldness in his words.
But she hated herself more.
For she had hesitated, wondering among duty, honor, and the most important thing in her life.
There was no trace of him when she finally left a note and went after him from the underground.
She had tried hard to remember what he had said before and tried to imagine which direction he would be heading.
She was thrilled when she found his abandoned rover parked beside a huge fungus field at a cliff side.
But all trails had gone cold from there.
She had found her black butterfly in his rover.
She knew he never intended to use it when she gave it to him.
But it still made her heart sink seeing it left behind.
He did not leave anything for her, not a clue, or a note.
She knew him too well to expect otherwise.
Still she spent the entire night inside his rover, wishing to find the last warmth of his presence.
She had left her own rover there and started walking on foot.
That was five days ago, or so she believed.
She was not really sure about days and times any more.
Her foods were all gone, and she was no longer bothered by the sourness of her legs and feet.
The worst part was the quietness, the fear.
Having lived long in the underground tunnels of the Hive, she was not used to staying above ground for so long.
The world around her seemed so big and strange, and she felt so small and lonely.
Lily had kept her company, and kept her safe from the mindworms.
But he didn't have a mindworm of his own, how would the nights be for him?
She stopped in front of another patch of fungus while Lily happily dived into it.
The unattended fungus grew wildly.
He couldn't have been here.
But where could he be?
She sighed to herself and started to clear up an area where she could start a fire.
The night was getting chillier.
She sat in front of the fire, arms wrapped around her knees.
It was such a strange feeling.
She had nothing to lean upon, nothing to hold on to.
The sky was so high, as if it was going to fall.
The fire was flickering, as if it was unreal.
She closed her eyes, rocking herself back and forth slowly without conscious.... I'd catch you when you jumped, and hold your hand afterwards...
She heard his voice again, warm and comforting beside her ears.
She kept her eyes closed, wishing sleep would soon fall upon her....
A finger, gently lifted a curl of hair from her temple.
She trembled inside, but she kept her eyes closed tight. She could smell him, and feel the warmness of his body. It was him...
His hand continued caressing her hair. She stayed still, afraid that it would go away.
His hands slowly traced the edge of her face, slid to her neck, and down to her shoulders.
A little gasp escaped her lips when they were touched by his lips.
The world started to fade away...
Her blood felt hot... Every cell of her body hungrily breathed him in. She moaned...
He deepened his kiss. She was lost in a sea... floating... She could not breathe... His hand caressing her...
Long fingers wrapped around her neck, tightening...Half consciously, she tried moving her head back away from him, but she couldn't. Her mouth covered by his...
She struggled to push him away but she couldn't.
He was caressing... tightening...
Whispers surrounded her, seducing, luring... "Hongieee..." Please...
She couldn't breathe...
A sharp pain shot through her head and she was suddenly free.
She opened her eyes wide and gasped in fresh air.
Lily rotated around her, while a large boil of mindworms slowly receded toward the crimson colored fungus.
"You saved me."
She looked at Lily appreciatively.
As if reading her mind, Lily stopped rotating and descended in front of her.
Pressing on her aching temple, she knew she was too tired.
She would not have fallen under the psych assault of the worms this easily, if she were her normal self.
Centauri A was rising from the horizon.
It was time to head back, she decided, pushing away all thoughts of him....
His hand touching her body...
She shook her head, and looked toward the direction the mindworm went, hoping to redirect her thought to the imminent danger.
Her blood froze at what she saw.
Far inside the red fungus, a colony of golden mindworms wiggled, their antennae thrusting into the air.
A man stood in the middle of the mindworms, fighting to keep them away from him.
It's him!
She pushed Lily away, and continued running toward him.