Memnoch the Devil
Chapter 12
He continued: "Immediately following these words," he said, "there was a great commotion in Heaven over who wanted to go down and examine the Creation with me and who did not.
Now understand, angels were all over Creation as it was, as I've told you, and many had already been years on Earth, and fallen in love with creeks, ana valleys, and even the deserts which had begun to appear.
But this was a special message the Lord had given me- Go and Learn All You Can About Mankind- and there was some question as to who was as interested or as passionate about the mysteries of the human race as was I."
"Wait a minute," I interrupted. "If you forgive me. How many angels are there?
You quoted God as saying 'all ranks,' and 'all endowments.' "
"Surely you've heard some of the truth," he answered, "from the lore. God created us first- the archangels- Memnoch, Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, and many others whose names have never been discovered- either inadvertently or deliberately- so I would rather not say.
The whole number of archangels?
Fifty.
And we were the First Made as I said, though who exactly came before whom has become a hysterical subject of argument in Heaven, and one in which I lost interest a long time ago.
Besides, I'm convinced I am the first anyway. But it doesn't matter.
"We are those who communicate in the most direct way with God, and also with Earth.
That's why we have been labeled Guardian Angels, as well as Archangels, and sometimes in the religious literature we are given a low rank. We don't have a low rank.
What we have is the greatest personality and the greatest flexibility, between God and man."
"I see.
And Raziel?
And Metatron?
And Remiel?"
He smiled. "I knew these names would be familiar to you," he said.
"They all have their place among the Archangels, but I cannot possibly explain all of this to you now.
You'll know when you're dead.
And also it's almost too much for a human mind, even a vampiric mind, such as your own, to comprehend."
"Very well," I said. "But what you're saying is the names refer to actual entities.
Sariel is an entity."
"Yes."
"Zagzagel."
"Yes, an entity.
Now let me continue. Let me stick with the schemes.
We, as I told you, are God's Messengers, and Most Powerful Angels, and I was fast becoming God's Accuser, as you can see!"
"And Satan means accuser," I said. "And all those other dreadful names you don't like are in some way connected with that idea. Accuser."
"Exactly," he replied. "And the early religious writers, knowing only bits and pieces of the truth, thought it was man whom I accused, not God; but there are reasons for this, as you'll soon see.
You might say I have become the Great Accuser of everybody."
He seemed mildly exasperated, but then his voice resumed, very calm and measured.
"But my name is Memnoch," he reminded me, "and there is no angel more powerful or clever than I am and there never was."
"I see," I said, meaning this to be polite. And also because I actually didn't question this statement at all.
Why should I?
"The Nine Choirs?" I asked.
"All there," he said.
"The Nine Choirs, of course, making up the bene ha elohim.
And very well described by Hebrew and Christian scholars, thanks to times of revelation and perhaps disaster, though one would be hard put to determine the nature of each event.
The First Triad is made of Three Choirs, the Seraphim, Cherubim, and Thrones or Ophanim, as I prefer to call them.
And this First Triad is in general locked to the glory of God. They are in His thrall, thrive in the light which can blind or dazzle others, and almost never get very far from the light at all.
"At times when I am angry and making speeches to all of Heaven, I accuse them ... if you'll pardon the expression again- of being held to God as if by a magnet and not having a free will or personality such as we possess.
But they have these things, they do, even the Ophanim, who are in general the least articulate or eloquent- in fact, Ophanim are likely to say nothing for eons- and any of these First Triad can be sent by God to do this and that, and have appeared on Earth, and some of the Seraphim have made rather spectacular appearances to men and women as well.
To their credit, they adore God utterly, they experience without reserve the ecstasy of His presence, and He fills them completely so that they do not ask questions of Him and they are more docile, or more truly aware of God, depending on one's point of view.
"The Second Triad has Three Choirs which have been given the names by men of Dominations, Virtues, and Powers.
But to tell the truth, there is very little difference between these angels and the First Triad.
The Second Triad is a little farther from the Light of God and perhaps as close as it can come, given its endowments, and perhaps it is not so clever when it comes to logic or questions.
Who knows?
Certainly the Second is more docile altogether; but then there is more coming and going from the Second Triad, from Earth to Heaven, than from the devoted and magnetized and sometimes arrogant Seraphim.
You can see how this could lead to much discussion."
"I think I understand it."
"Both triads sing continuously when they are in Heaven, and most of the time when they are on Earth; their songs rise to Heaven spontaneously and continuously; they don't erupt with the deliberate jubilation of my song or the songs of those like me.
Nor do they fall silent for long periods as my kind- Archangels- are apt to do.
"When you're dead you'll be able to hear the song of all these triads.
It would destroy you now if you did.
I've let you hear part of the Din of Heaven, but that's all it can be to you, a din- the sound of song and mingled laughter, and seemingly erratic eruptions of beautiful sound."
I nodded.
It had been both painful and gorgeous to hear it.
"The Lowest Triad is supposed to include Principalities, Archangels, and Angels," he continued, "but this is misleading, as I said.
For we, the Archangels, are in fact the most powerful and the most important, have the most personality, and are the most questioning and concerned.
"But here you have the rough scheme of things.
The angels are innumerable. And there is mobility among angels, some drifting closer to God than others, and then away when the majesty is too great for them, and they choose to slip back and sing a softer song.
It's continuous.
"Now, the important thing is that the Guardian Angels of Earth, the Watchers, those who became intent upon the Creation, came from all these ranks! Even from the very Seraphim there have come Guardians who have spent millions of years on Earth and then gone Home.
Going and coming is common.
The disposition I describe is innate but not fixed.
"Angels aren't perfect. You can see that already. They are Created Beings.
They don't know everything God knows, that's obvious to you and everyone else.
But they know a great deal; they know all that can be known in Time if they wish to know it; and that is where angels differ, you see.
Some wish to know everything in Time, and some care only for God and God's reflection in those of His most devoted souls."