Memnoch the Devil
Chapter 20 THE GARDEN of Waiting
The tranquil and radiant place before the Heavenly Gates. A place from which souls return from time to time, when death brings them into it, and they are then told that it is not the moment, and they can go home again.
In the distance, beneath the shining cobalt sky, I saw the Newly Dead greet the Older Dead. Gathering after gathering. I saw the embraces, heard the exclamations.
Out of the corner of my eyes, I saw the dizzyingly high walls of Heaven, and Heaven's gates.
This time I saw the angels, less solid than all the rest, chorus after chorus, moving through the skies, unbound and dipping down at will into the little crowds of mortals crossing the bridge.
Shifting between visibility and invisibility, the angels moved, watched, drifted upwards to fade into the inexhaustible blue of the sky.
The sounds of Heaven were faint and achingly seductive as they came from beyond the walls.
I could close my eyes and almost see the sapphirine colors!
All songs sang the same refrain: "Come in, come here, come inside, be with us.
Chaos is no more. This is Heaven."
But I was far from all this, in a little valley.
I sat amid wildflowers, tiny white and yellow wildflowers, on the grass bank of the stream which all souls cross to get into Heaven, only here it seemed no more than any magnificent rushing stream.
Or rather, it sang a song that said?
after smoke and war, after soot and blood, after stench and pain?
All streams are as magnificent as this stream.
Water sings in multiple voices as it slides over rocks and down through tiny gullies and rushes abruptly over rises in the earth so that it may again tumble in a mingling of fugue and canon. While the grass bends its head to watch.
I rested against the trunk of a tree, what the peach tree might be if she bloomed forever, both blossoms and fruit, so that she was never bare of either, and her limbs hung down not in submission, but with this richness, this fragrance, this offering, this fusion of two cycles into one eternal abundance.
Above, amid fluttering petals, the supply of which seemed inexhaustible and never alarming, I saw the fleeting movement of tiny birds.
And beyond that, angels, and angels, and angels, as if they were made of air, the light luminous glittering spirits so faint as to vanish at times in one brilliant breath of the sky.
The Paradise of murals; the Paradise of mosaics. Only no form of art can touch this. Question those who have come and gone.
Those whose hearts have stopped on an operating table, so that their souls flew to this garden, and then were brought back down into articulate flesh.
Nothing can touch it.
The cool, sweet air surrounded me, slowly removing, layer by layer, the soot and filth that clung to my coat and my shirt.
Suddenly, as if waking to life again from nightmare, I reached inside my shirt and drew out the veil. I unfolded it and held it by its two edges.
The face burned in it, the dark eyes staring at me, the blood as brilliantly red as before, the skin the perfect hue, the depth almost holographic, though the whole expression moved very faintly as the veil moved on the breeze.
Nothing had been smeared, torn, or lost.
I felt myself gasp, and my heart speeded dangerously. The heat flooded to my own face.
The brown eyes were steady in their gaze as they had been at that moment, not closing for the soft finely woven fabric.
I drew the whole veil close to me, then folded it up again, almost in a panic, and shoved it tight against my skin this time, inside my shirt.
I struggled to restore all the buttons to their proper holes. My shirt was all right.
My coat was filthy though intact, but all its buttons were gone, even the buttons that had graced the sleeves and had been no longer of any use and were merely decorative.