The Starship Mechanic
The floor of Borderlands Books had been polished to mirror brightness.
A nice trick with old knotty pine, but Penauch would have been a weapons-grade obsessive-compulsive if he'd been human.
I'd thought about setting him to detailing my car, but he's just as likely to polish it down to aluminum and steel after deciding the paint was an impurity.
When he discovered that the human race recorded our ideas in books, he'd been impossible to keep away from the store.
Penauch didn't actually read them, not as such, and he was most reluctant to touch the volumes.
He seemed to view books as vehicles, launch capsules to propel ideas from the dreaming mind of the human race into our collective forebrain.
Despite the fact that Penauch was singular, unitary, a solitary alien in the human world, he apparently didn't conceive of us as anything but a collective entity.
The xenoanthropologists at Berkeley were carving Ph.D.s out of that particular clay as fast as their grad students could transcribe Penauch's conversations with me.
He'd arrived the same as David Bowie in that old movie.
No, not Brother from Another Planet; The Man Who Fell to Earth.
Tumbled out of the autumn sky over the Cole Valley neighborhood of San Francisco like a maple seed, spinning with his arms stretched wide and his mouth open in a teakettle shriek audible from the Ghost Fleet in Suisun Bay all the way down to the grubby streets of San Jose.
The subject's fallsacs when fully deployed serve as a tympanum, producing a rhythmic vibration at a frequency perceived by the human ear as a high-pitched shriek.
Xenophysiological modeling has thus far failed to generate testable hypotheses concerning the volume of the sound produced.
Some observers have speculated that the subject deployed technological assistance during atmospheric entry, though no evidence of this was found at the landing site, and subject has never indicated this was the case.
-- Scholes, Jen West.
A Reader's Guide to Earth's Only Living Spaceman.
Feldman, Jude A. San Francisco: Borderlands Books, 2014.
It was easier keeping Penauch in the bookstore. The owners didn't mind.
They'd had hairless cats around the place for years--a breed called sphinxes.
The odd animals served as a neighborhood tourist attraction and business draw.
A seven-foot alien with a face like a plate of spaghetti and a cluster of writhing arms wasn't all that different.
Not in a science fiction bookstore, at least.
Thing is, when Penauch was out in the world, he had a tendency to fix things.
This fixing often turned out to be not so good. No technology was involved.
Penauch's body was demonstrably able to modify the chitinous excrescences of his appendages at will.
If he needed a cutting edge, he ate a bit of whatever steel was handy and swiftly metabolized it.
If he needed electrical conductors, he sought out copper plumbing.
If he needed logic probes, he consumed sand or diamonds or glass.
It was all the same to Penauch.
As best any of us could figure out, Penauch was a sort of tool.
A Swiss army knife that some spacefaring race had dropped or thrown away, abandoned until he came to rest on Earth's alien shore.
And Penauch only spoke to me.
The question of Penauch's mental competence has bearing in both law and ethics.
Pratt and Shaw (2013) have effectively argued that the alien fails the Turing test, both at a gross observational level and within the context of finer measurements of conversational intent and cooperation.
Cashier (2014) claims an indirectly derived Stanford-Binet score in the 99th percentile, but seemingly contradicts herself by asserting that Penauch's sentience is at best an open question.
Is he (or it) a machine, a person, or something else entirely?
--Browne, S. G. "A Literature Review of the Question of Alien Mentation."
Journal of Exogenic Studies II
4 (August 2015).
The first time he fixed something was right after he'd landed.
Penauch impacted with that piercing shriek at 2:53 p.m. Pacific Time on Saturday, July 16, 2011, at the intersection of Cole and Parnassus.
Every window within six blocks shattered.
Almost a hundred pedestrians and shoppers in the immediate area were treated for lacerations from broken glass, over two dozen more for damage to hearing and sinuses.
I got to him first, stumbling out of Cole Hardware with a headache like a cartoon anvil had been dropped on me.
Inside, we figured a bomb had gone off.
All the vases in the homeware section had exploded.
Luckily I'd been with the fasteners.
The nails sang, but they didn't leap off the shelves and try to make hamburger of me.
Outside, there was this guy lying in a crater in the middle of the intersection, like Wile E. Coyote after he'd run out of Acme patented jet fuel.
I hurried over, touched his shoulder, and realized what a goddamned mess he was.
Then half a dozen eyes opened, and something like a giant rigatoni farted before saying, "Penauch."
Weird thing was, I could hear the spelling.
Though I didn't know it in that moment, my old life was over, my new one begun.
Penauch then looked at my shattered wristwatch, grabbed a handful of BMW windshield glass, sucked it down, and moments later fixed my timepiece.
For some value of "fixed."
It still tells time, somewhere with a base seventeen counting system and twenty-eight point one five seven hours a day.
It shows me the phases of Phobos and Deimos, evidence that he'd been on (or near) Mars.
Took a while to figure that one out.
And the thing warbles whenever someone gets near me carrying more than about eight ounces of petroleum products.
Including grocery bags, for example, and most plastics.
I could probably get millions for it on eBay.
Penauch's first artifact, and one of less than a dozen in private hands.
The government owns him now, inasmuch as anyone owns Penauch.
They can't keep him anywhere.
He "fixes" his way out of any place he gets locked into.
He comes back to San Francisco, finds me, and we go to the bookstore.
Where Penauch polishes the floors and chases the hairless cats and draws pilgrims from all over the world to pray in Valencia Street.