Twenty-Ten
Patrolman Clive Hart backs his cruiser off the country road and parks it, just out of sight, down a weedy lane that separates fields of half-grown Christmas trees.
He turns off his headlights and waits to arrest his father, Dexter Hart, who will soon make his regular New Year's Eve drunken drive down this country road en route to his annual Ritual of Purification at the abandoned limestone quarry.
Every year Clive's old man takes off his clothes, leaps from the sheer cliff at midnight, and whistles down through sixty stark-naked feet of air. He breaks the cold surface of the old year and plunges deep into the dark waters, power-washed, as Dex puts it, of all the wrongdoings he has accrued.
His freshly shucked misdeeds sink down, he claims, maybe hundreds of feet, to settle among the rusted equipment abandoned when the quarry filled, down where catfish, it is rumored, have grown big enough to swallow a man whole.
In this timeless place, Clive's old man hovers a moment in suspension before he flutters up like a champagne bubble to emerge guilt free in the New Year, ready to jibe and cackle and behave, for yet another twelve months, like an asshole-like the kind of guy who would post a YouTube video of his son, titled "Dumb, Fat Cop," now at almost one million views.
But there will be no Ritual of Purification this time, not in twenty-ten, not if Clive has his way.
Tonight his plan is to see that Dex wakes up caged and dirty, his first sensation of the New Year claustrophobia and the drunk tank's tang of piss and vomit.
Twenty-ten, he imagines, will be a new era, the son absolved of his dickhead father.
It is 10:20 P.M.
Clive swivels open his book light and works through a practice logic section of his LSAT test-prep materials.
He doesn't do so well: His last attempt was 80th percentile, he needs 90th, tonight he descends to 60th.
At 11:28 P.M., the headlights of Dex's '85 F150 poke their yellow beams down the road.
He lets his father disappear around the next curve before he pulls out of the weeds.
He takes his time catching up. His old man drives straight and under the speed limit.
He is a capable drunk driver, except his habit on back roads is to center himself in the middle, to straddle the imaginary line.
The silver seatbelt latch flaps in the wind.
Clive makes sure his onboard camera gets a close-up of the missing passenger's side taillight.
Two hours ago, Clive hammered the light with a rock.
Dex sticks his arm out the window and waves him around.
The old man is beloved by the cops in Quarryside.
He owns a garage that gives at-cost repairs to officers' personal vehicles, and in return he holds a maintenance and repair contract for the whole town fleet, even the parking meter mobiles.
Dex also pours beers at The Checker Flag, which he owns as more of a hobby than a business, a bar where NASCAR plays on TVs and cops order themselves on bar stools less by rank than by the crustiness of seniority- a system by which Dex is more police than Clive.
They swore him in like they were performing an arranged marriage; it was Dex they wanted.
Red and blue lights dance on the pavement.
Dex pulls over but doesn't turn off his engine.
Clive sees his father's special tap: twice on each shoulder, twice on the cab ceiling.
Dex is a ritualistic, even superstitious man.
He was a star high school athlete with lucky jersey numbers and unvarying warm-up routines. It might be mild OCD.
He has to drum on all five taps in his bar, in a particular order, before he pours a beer.
He has made his leap into the quarry every New Year since he was sixteen, and it is going to drive him mad to miss it.
Clive hopes.
"Engine off," Clive says through the external speaker.
"Softy, is that you?" his father calls out, looking back and squinting in the headlights.
Clive deepens his voice: "Shut off the motor."
Dex turns it off.
Clive has the citation written.
He doesn't call it in.
There is a woman in the car with Dex. Young, he guesses from her hairstyle.
Clive gets out.
"Let's see who this guy thinks he is pulling over," he hears Dex brag.
"Shit, it's Softy," he hears him say. Dex laughs.
"Softy! Can't you toast me happy New Year later?"
"License and registration."
His father smirks his stubble-bearded face.
It's this confidence, Clive guesses, that endears Dex to people- the reason girls like this one, a beauty not long out of college, find him handsome.
Clive's face won't do the smirk. He has tried in the mirror.
"Sir," says Clive.
He's not trying to be respectful.
He can't let his professional mask slip or he might lose his nerve.
Already, he's a few feet farther from the driver's side window than usual.
"You were in the middle of the road, Mr. Hart, with a broken taillight and no seat belt.
License and registration, please."
Clive beams his flashlight at his father's face, right in his eyes.
The girl's breasts hang brightly in the white light.
Both of them are already naked.
The girl laughs.
Dex guffaws.
"That's another citation," says Clive, but his father's nakedness has caught him off guard, his mask has dropped.
Dex starts up the truck.
"Shut off that motor!" Clive yells.
"I'm going to administer a breathalyzer test, sir.
Out of the fucking car, Dad!"
Dex pulls forward a few feet.
Clive runs after.
Dex pulls forward. Clive runs after.
This time Dex keeps rolling.
"You know where to find me," Dex calls out the window.
"Arrest me when I'm a new man."
Clive pursues his father.
He is surprised to be so angry.
This is not only what he'd expected; it is what he'd hoped.
It's all on camera: evidence for the court.
He intentionally garbles a message to dispatch.
They ask him several times to repeat.
"It's okay, I've got it handled," Clive says.
He'll call it in soon, but he doesn't want someone else to get to Dex first. They'll arrest him too gently.
When the cuffs go on, it should hurt.
At 110 mph the cruiser catches up to the truck so quickly that Clive nearly rear-ends him.
He glimpses his dad's eyes in the truck's rearview mirror.
It reminds him of sitting cross-legged, twelve-years-old, on top of a wobbly table at the back of The Checkered Flag, his Sega hooked up to the only TV not tuned to sports.
Dex would glance in the mirror behind the bottles to keep an eye on him.
Clive's mom had left before he had a memory of her, so he did his nightly homework at the bar under Dex's supervision, rushing through it to get to the Sega and the best game ever: The Saga of Elf Boy III: Shards of The Ruby Heart.
Depeche Mode would've played on the Sony Discman.
Even with his back to his father, Clive could see Dex, too, by using the Budweiser Racing mirror on the rear wall.
"That boy," he heard his father say in the space between CD tracks. The next song started.
He watched Dex pretend to toggle a video game controller frantically with both thumbs, his cheeks blown out to simulate his son's plump face.
Dex made an arc with one hand to exaggerate his son's soft belly.
Dex held up one thumb and used the other to show how big Clive's thumbs were bound to grow, his only muscle.
The bar laughed loud enough that Clive could hear it over the headphones.
Dex glanced in the mirror.
They briefly touched eyes in the free-fall space of double reflections.
Dex drummed on the taps, poured himself a beer.
On the TV, Elf Boy was under attack by trolls. His health rating flashed.
Clive and Elf Boy fought their way to the icon of a glowing red heart: a shard of the ruby that, put back together, would heal the land.
If he survived this stage he'd rescue the hot elfin princess.
In his dreams, Clive was svelte Elf Boy and Elf Girl was his.
This holiday season, Clive saw Elfin Warrior Princess Twenty-Ten.
She does her own ass-kicking now, belongs to no one.
He tries to pull alongside Dex, and Dex blocks him.
But the beat-up truck that Dex tuned can't compete on pavement with the muscled-up cruiser that Dex also tuned.
The pursuit goes off road.
The truck smashes a wood fence, careens onto a new golf course attached to Quarryside Estates.
Clive pulls alongside his father on the fairway.
Dex rams him.
Clive catches back up.
Before Dex can ram him again, Clive taps the truck's rear bumper, like he has seen so many times at the races.
His father spins.
A wheel comes off.
The truck digs a long black groove to a halt.
A white ghost flashes across the fairway. Clive's naked father runs for the trees, in the direction of the quarry, which is at hole eighteen on the other side of the development.
Clive believes he could catch Dex now in a dead sprint to the woods.
He isn't "Softy" anymore.
After spending a depressed month, nearly a year ago, watching "Dumb, Fat Cop," Clive decided he would wait to confront his father until he, Clive, changed himself.
He hit the weights and the track.
He is dumb and fat no longer, and the old man is an ectomorph: He might be able to outlast his son in a test of endurance, but he can't overpower him, can't beat Clive in a race to the woods.
But Clive runs to the girl instead.
The cruiser camera is still recording and he needs to do the right thing.
Also, he has another plan, his original plan, in the form of a prototype Segway ATV that rests in a custom rack on the rear of the cruiser.
Clive wrote the grant application himself, in anticipation of this very scenario.
Dexter dubbed it Nerd Mobile, and the name spread through the department.
When Clive operates Nerd Mobile, he feels like he is in a video game.
The prototype's set-up is not unlike a game controller, and Clive turned out to be a natural.
He can do three 360-degree swivels in a row, descend stairs, hit bumps and get some air- even if just a little.
Clive does not want to sprint and tackle his father before the woods because the irony of catching Dex with thumb dexterity and hand-eye skill gives Clive a very large, figurative boner.
Clive shines his flashlight on the girl, who this time covers her breasts and curses.
She gets out of the truck and into his face.
He backs off and requests an ambulance, even though she looks fine.
Beautiful, actually: Like an Elfin princess, ready to kick his ass.
When Clive hits the development's smooth asphalt, Nerd Mobile's motor hums near its 20 mph top speed.
Clive turns on both lights and siren.
He wants to strike fear in his father's heart, wants Dex to know he is coming.
He sees the naked specter crash out of the woods, onto the front lawns.
Clive is surprised at how gaunt the old man has become, starved-looking, like something out of the newest strain of zombie movie.
Clive remembers him as more muscular than this.
They used to stand together in the pickup's headlights every New Year's Eve, at quarry's edge, father naked and son stripped down to boxers- despite Dex insisting it wouldn't work right if he weren't naked.
On the count of three, Dex would run, plummet, and plunge.