At lunch, Zichen told her two co workers that she was considering going to a new place for her vacation.
Feeling more adventurous this year? Ted said.
Since Zichen had begun to work with Henry and Ted, thirteen years earlier, she had taken two weeks off every November to visit China- her hibernation retreat, as Ted called it.
England, she said now when he asked, and she wondered which would be more adventurous in her colleagues' opinion, England or China.
Henry had been sent to Vietnam at eighteen, and had returned to Iowa six months later with ruptured intestines; at nineteen, barely recovered, he had married his high-school sweetheart.
Every summer he and Caroline spent three weeks in a lakeside cabin in Wisconsin with their children and grandchildren.
The farthest place Ted had travelled to was Chicago.
A few years earlier, he had accompanied his daughter there for a high-school volleyball tournament; her team had lost in the final match, and with his daughter now a senior at the state university Ted still held Chicago responsible for the disappointment.
What's there to see in England in November? Ted asked.
Zichen did not answer, because anything she said would fall short of his expectations.
In previous years, he had wondered belligerently what there was to see in China, and Henry had been the one to shush Ted.
Like Zichen's other acquaintances in America, they had been led to believe that in China she had a pair of parents, and that, like many, she had wedged some distance between herself and her parents, reducing her filial duty to an annual two-week visit.
What about China?
Henry asked, laying out his lunch- a sandwich, a thermos of soup, and a banana- on a paper napkin.
His time in the Army must have taught him to keep the contents of his life in good order.
Henry was a neat man, his lab coat clean, what remained of his hair combed and parted precisely; he was quiet, but said enough not to seem sullen.
Her parents were taking a tour to Thailand with a group of retired people, Zichen said.
Why couldn't she meet them in Thailand?
Ted demanded, and predicted that she would see nothing in England but rain and coldness and people who were too polite to ask her to repeat her name.
There was a reason to visit a place where one's name was unpronounceable, Zichen thought, just as there was a reason that her parents continued to share a life in their daughter's mind.
A month from now, rather than telling Henry and Ted about England, Zichen knew she would be relating tales of her parents' trip to Thailand: the crowded marketplace after nightfall, the cabaret show that they disliked but felt obliged to enjoy because it was said to be the highlight of their tour, the hotel bed that was too hard, or perhaps too soft.
There were other moments, also imagined, though these she would keep to herself: her father's insistence on splitting a dish in a restaurant because he was unwilling to pay for two, her mother eying a grain of rice on her father's sleeve without pointing it out.
They would've been one of those couples who had married young, and had, over the years, developed their separate ways to live with the mistake, he with his tyranny, she with her wordless contempt.
Henry, Ted, and Zichen worked in an animal-care center, in a two-story brick building next to a research facility that a hundred years ago had been an infirmary for tuberculosis patients.
Because they were on the edge of a university town- the facility, a satellite site that housed some projects from the medical school, was in the middle of cornfields- the three of them had over the years become a more or less autonomous unit.
Janice, their supervisor, a tall and angular woman who took pride in her extreme fairness and efficiency, came for a routine inspection once a week; Dr. Wilson, the attending veterinarian, a genial and absent-minded man, was about to retire any day now.
The only crisis since Zichen had begun to work there- if one did not count the time the water was contaminated and fifty cages of mice contracted hepatitis, or the occasions when breeding went wrong, and the due date passed without a litter, or worse, with a disturbed mother mouse feeding on her own babies- was when a group of animal-rights activists had tried to break into the building on the eve of the new millennium.
They had given up when the alarm went off, and instead liberated cages of minks from a farm thirty miles west on the country road.
The farmer and his family had recovered less than a third of their loss, the local paper had reported.
The rest of the minks, the farmer had told the Gazette, would not survive the Midwest winter and their many predators.
Zichen had been reading the newspaper in the office, pondering the fate of the homeless minks, when Henry, looking over her shoulder, said that he and the farmer had gone to the same high school.
She was about to express her sympathy for his old classmate when Henry mentioned that the guy had once pursued Caroline when he was in Vietnam.
She was glad that Caroline had not married the mink farmer, Zichen said, and Henry said he was, too, though come to think about it, perhaps Caroline wouldn't have minded a mink coat.
Ted, entering the office with a stack of yellow death slips to file and overhearing the conversation, reminded Henry that a mink farmer's wife does not wear mink, just as cobblers' children have no shoes.
What does that mean? Zichen asked.
When the expression was explained to her, she thought of the way her grandmother used to clip her hair shorter than a boy's, in summer or winter, but this would not make a good office tale.
Zichen had grown up in her grandmother's hair salon- a small shack really, at the entrance of an apartment complex, with a wooden plank propped up by two stacks of bricks that served as a bench for the waiting customers, a folding chair in front of a mirror that hung from a low beam, and a makeshift washstand, next to which a kettle of water was kept warm on a coal stove.
On the curtain that separated the salon from the bed shared by Zichen and her grandmother, there were prints of bunnies, white on a green-and-yellow background.
There was no window in the shack, and a fluorescent light was turned on the moment her grandmother opened up the shop and continued buzzing until the end of the day, giving everything a perpetual bluish-white hue.
That her grandmother could have had an easier life in her old age was made clear to Zichen from her first years: Zichen's two uncles- her mother's elder brothers- would have dutifully taken in their mother, and between the two families they would have seen to it that she had a decent retirement.
But how could you burden your own sons with a child like that? her grandmother used to ask her customers, as though the time Zichen had spent in the shop learning to sit up and then to walk, and later to assist her grandmother, handing her warm towels or cleaning the ashtrays- two blue-and-white china bowls placed at either end of the bench, the rims chipped, filled with smoldering cigarette ends and streaks of ash- had never softened the shock of the child's existence.
It would have been a different story had she been an orphan, her grandmother would say; it would have been sensible for any uncle to take in an orphan, a statement her audience readily agreed with.
Indeed, a woman who had run away with a man against her family's wish, who had given birth to a baby out of wedlock, and had then been abandoned by the man- that mother would have done her baby more of a favor had she died during childbirth.
It hadn't taken long for Zichen to piece together her own story from the parts alluded to by her grandmother and uncles and customers and neighbors: that her grandmother had agreed to raise her on the condition that her mother sever all connections with the family; that a couple had once come to the shop to look her over, but then decided not to adopt her; that she owed her life not only to her grandmother, who had to toil at an age when other women could rest, but also to the patrons of the shop, who remained loyal to her grandmother because of the responsibility they felt toward her.
Sitting on a bamboo stool in a corner and listening to her own luck, both good and bad, discussed, Zichen would clandestinely move her feet and make piles of hair according to a system known only to her.
Inevitably the game would be interrupted by the strokes of her grandmother's broom, but even that did not disturb Zichen, as the disassembling of the small hills of hair could also be part of her scheme.
Quit grinning like an idiot, her grandmother would sometimes tell Zichen, turning from her clipping, and Zichen would straighten her face, but when her grandmother turned back to her customer she smiled again at the back of a man's half-shaved head, or at the shoelaces of someone waiting on the bench.
Where on earth did the girl get that smile? her grandmother complained to the customers.
One would think a child like that should know how to make people forget her for a moment.
Hydrangea House, a sixteenth-century timber-framed house, had served as a family home for generations before it was turned into a B. and B.; Zichen wondered, reading the information provided on its Web site, how such a change had come about.
Perhaps the owners would tell her when she asked- if not the whole story, then bits and pieces that would nevertheless delight her.
On the Web site, there were no photographs of the kind that other places, with more business-minded management, displayed: blooming flowers in a garden or soft-colored curtains lifted by unseen wind.
Instead, a small sketch of the house, made in ink or perhaps pencil, showed little except a whitewashed front wall and four rectangular windows.
It was said to be "never a grand house"; two rooms, the Rose Room and the Lilac Room, were available upstairs.
The modest, almost apologetic way that Hydrangea House advertised itself made it easy for Zichen to choose it.
The trip to England, despite Henry's bafflement and Ted's disapproval, was becoming a certainty in her mind.
Tomorrow she would buy the plane ticket; next week she would call and reserve a room.
Contrary to Henry and Ted's beliefs, Zichen was neither an experienced nor a willing traveller.
The summer she had begun to work at the animal-care center, Ted had invited her, along with Caroline and Henry, to a picnic on the Fourth of July.
She had apologized and said that she needed to go to the East Coast to visit her husband, who had finished graduate school earlier that year and moved away for a job.
Before the holiday weekend, she had purchased more food than she could consume, and for four days she had hidden herself in her apartment and worked slowly through a Latin reader of Cicero's speeches.
She had picked up the book from the library not for any grand ideas she might glean from the text; sometimes she forgot a sentence the moment she figured out its meaning.
But the effort of making sense out of something that was at first glance indecipherable satisfied her, as did the slowness of the activity: an hour or two would pass as she made her way through one passage on a war; a day that would have otherwise been long was shortened.