The marriage had ended shortly before he moved away, but Zichen had used him to excuse herself from two years of social life.
The cheek of it.
When she lied to Henry and Ted, she could hear her grandmother's words, those she would say after Zichen had read her report card aloud in the shop.
Unable to concentrate, the teachers commented every year; a lack of interest in both studying and participating in school activities.
Her grades were meagre, barely good enough for her to proceed to the next level.
What will you do with your life if you don't catch up with your schoolwork? her grandmother's customers ceaselessly asked her; not knowing the answer, she would smile as though she did not understand the question, and it was her smile more than her grades that had marked her as beyond teachable.
Zichen had given Henry and Ted a skeletal account of her divorce the third year into her work, as it had not felt right to continue to lie about a marriage that no longer existed.
But an ex-husband was easy to be done with and never mentioned again, while a pair of parents, even if they lived on another continent, needed careful maintenance: an annual trip; phone calls that brought news from China; presents to take home- Wisconsin ginseng for her father, anti-aging cream for her mother.
She could easily take the usual trip back to China this year, a routine unbroken, thus causing little concern or suspense, but the truth was the shack that had housed her grandmother's shop had been demolished, her grandmother reduced to an urn of ashes.
Her grandmother had lived in the shop until a month before her death, at ninety-three, and Zichen knew that for as long as her grandmother had lived there the shop door was opened every morning, the fluorescent light kept on till closing time, as it was during her annual visits.
The news of the death had reached Zichen after the funeral; she had not been invited to it, as she knew her mother had not been.
Together they, rather than an early widowhood, were blamed for her grandmother's harsh life; together they had been the old woman's disappointments, a daughter who had brought humiliation to the family, a granddaughter who had rashly married a man she had met twice and had then been unable to stay married for longer than three years.
The B. and B. was in a village called Neville Hill, some distance from Brighton, but to simplify the matter Zichen told Ted and Henry that Brighton was her final destination.
They were eating lunch together, savoring one of the last warm autumn days before a cold front set in.
She described the places she wanted to see: the promenade, the beach, the English Channel.
"Now, explain two things to me," Ted said, and for a moment Zichen thought Henry looked relieved that someone was going to confront her as he would never do.
"First, why do you want to go to the beach in the winter?"
November was not winter yet, Zichen argued, and Ted merely nodded at her with a triumphant smile as though he had cornered a runaway rat that Zichen wasn't able to catch.
It was rare that a mouse or a rat slipped through her grip, and when it did happen- a few times over the years- Ted would talk about it for days afterward with a childlike glee.
When you touch an animal, it can tell right away if you are nervous or if you are the master, Henry had explained to Zichen when he trained her.
Ted, during the first weeks, had liked to seek her out and tell her gruesome tales; his favorite one concerned a homemade rat guillotine that he and Henry had once built for a neurologist's study.
But to her co-workers' surprise Zichen had never been jittery.
She had applied for the opening because she had no other profitable skills, but in retrospect she wondered if she had found the right job out of blind luck.
From the beginning, she had clipped a mouse's ear or prepped a rat for a skin graft as deftly as if she had always worked with animals.
Even the bigger mammals had not distressed her: the monkeys that clamored in the cages and made faces at her when she came in with feed or a hose, the forlorn-looking dogs that rarely barked.
After her training, Henry had told her that he and Ted would split the care of bigger mammals because they thought her too small, for instance, to dispose of a thirty-pound carcass by herself.
The Rodent Queen- on her thirtieth birthday, they had left a toy crown on her desk, the words scrawled on with permanent marker.
"Now, winter or not winter," Ted said.
"Why do you want to go to England all by yourself?"
People travelled alone all the time, Zichen said, and there was nothing wrong with that.
"But what are you going to do in a place where you don't know anyone?"
"How do you know I don't know anyone there?" Zichen said, but the moment the words came out she regretted them.
Over the years she had become accustomed to who she was in other people's eyes: she knew she would be considered a loser by her Chinese acquaintances in America, a divorced woman toiling her life away in an animal-care facility, someone who had failed to make it;
in her landlord's and neighbors' eyes she was the quiet, good-mannered foreigner who paid her rent on time, who every Halloween put out a couple of pumpkins, uncarved but with drawn-on eyes and mouths, and who had no visitors on weekends or holidays, so there was no conflict regarding the guest parking;
for her grandmother and her aging customers, who spent their days in the shack for conversation and companionship more than for the care of their thinning hair or balding heads, she was- despite being a baby who should have remained unborn, a child with little merit and an unnerving manner, and a young woman who had no respect for marriage or her own future- a proof, in the end, of the ultimate mercy of life.
She had been able to build a life out of her failures, to wire dollars to her grandmother, to return every year like a loyal homing pigeon and sit with the old customers, still with that unnerving smile on her face although they no longer cared; simply sitting with them and listening to them had absolved Zichen of all possible sins.
But it was who she was in the eyes of Henry and Ted that she cherished the most: sure-handed and efficient at her job, quiet yet at times chatty, uncomplicated.
That she had memorized passages from "Winnie-the-Pooh," that she had read its Latin translation before reading the English text, she did not share with them, because that would make her an eccentric in their eyes.
The things that gave her pleasure- the pile of wood shavings meant for the animals' bedding, which she assembled into small hills;
the time she spent imagining her ex-husband in a pale-blue suburban house in New Jersey, his two sons growing up and looking more like him each year, his new wife unaging;
the marriage she had given her father, whom she had never known, and her mother, whom she had met only once, in a small one-bedroom apartment in an older neighborhood in Beijing- these she did not share with Henry and Ted, because they would have made her a person with a history, in this or that time, this or that place.
"So, you are meeting someone in England?" Ted said.
"No," Zichen said.
"Why should I?"
The unusual confrontational tone in her reply made Ted flinch, as though he had trespassed.
He shrugged and, with a theatrical gesture, threw a half-eaten sandwich to a squirrel.
Years earlier, Molly, Ted's wife, had asked Zichen if she wanted to meet someone she knew who was available; Henry's wife, Caroline, had mentioned once or twice her Chinese dentist, divorced, according to his office manager.
When Zichen had not followed up on either lead, the women had not pressed her.
Henry and Ted had never asked about her personal life.
The ease into which the three of them had settled left her life outside work irrelevant, and she liked to imagine that for them it was as natural for her to cease to exist the moment she left work as it was natural that she could handle the animals with confidence and calm.
The only time they had experienced discomfort was when Henry first trained her to breed the mice- he had asked Ted to be present when he showed her how to detect vaginal plugs, the evidence of successful copulation.
Beet red, Henry had grabbed a few females to display their private parts to Zichen, then explained that sometimes the plugs did not guarantee pregnancy.
Ted, rearranging the charts on the cages with a look of concentration, had remained uncharacteristically quiet on a subject that he might otherwise have joked about with Henry.
Had Ted been offended by her abruptness, Zichen wondered, but she could not find the words to soften the tension as he continued to whistle to the squirrel, which was ignoring his generosity.
She had unwisely opened a door and then clumsily slammed it shut, but perhaps some harm had already been done.
"You'll do just fine," Henry said when it was apparent that Ted would not fill the rest of the lunch break with one of his favorite topics, the upcoming basketball game or a wrestling match.
"When you think about it, I've seen my share of pictures of China but never any of England."
Zichen took pictures when she travelled to China, of things she imagined Henry might like to see, or of strange sights that would offer Ted an opportunity to criticize.
Yes, she agreed.
England would be a good change.
She then dusted off the crumbs from the picnic table so that they would not find ants crawling over their space the next day.
Before she had joined them, Henry and Ted used to eat in the office, the door open to the hallway with its constant odor of bleach and rodent pellets and damp bedding and dead animals; they did not seem to be bothered by this, but when Henry noticed that Zichen often sat on the steps in front of the building to eat her lunch, he had requested a picnic table as an improvement for their work environment.
Josephina, the proprietress of Hydrangea House, had been easy to talk with on the phone.
If she had felt curious as to why a woman from America with an unpronounceable Chinese name would want to spend two weeks in Neville Hill she had not shown it.
Zichen wondered, after the phone call, whether the thought would be shared with Josephina's husband; she wondered if they would decide that such a question did not matter in a bed-and-breakfast business.
When she got to Neville Hill, Zichen would explain to the owners that she had come in memory of an elderly woman who had befriended her when she first moved to America.
Margaret was the woman's name.
She had spent her childhood in Neville Hill before marrying an American pastor, John Hubor, and had lived in the States for fifty-three years.
Would the couple at Hydrangea House try to locate a girl in the village's past, one who had left, taken away by a marriage after the war?
Perhaps they had heard of a girl named Margaret, or perhaps they would apologize for having no such recollection.
The truth was, the name Neville Hill had never been mentioned in any of Zichen's conversations with Margaret, yet it was Neville Hill that Zichen had decided to go to, her research fitting the village to an old woman's descriptions: the school trips to Seaford taken on foot; the car rides to Brighton for special family occasions.