Stone mattress
At the outset Verna had not intended to kill anyone.
What she had in mind was a vacation, pure and simple.
Take a breather, do some inner accounting, shed worn skin.
The Arctic suits her: there's something inherently calming in the vast cool sweeps of ice and rock and sea and sky, undisturbed by cities and highways and trees and the other distractions that clutter up the landscape to the south.
Among the clutter she includes other people, and by other people she means men.
She's had enough of men for a while.
She's made an inner memo to renounce flirtations and any consequences that might result from them.
She doesn't need the cash, not anymore.
She's not extravagant or greedy, she tells herself: all she ever wanted was to be protected by layer upon layer of kind, soft, insulating money, so that nobody and nothing could get close enough to harm her.
Surely she has at last achieved this modest goal.
But old habits die hard, and it's not long before she's casting an appraising eye over her fleece-clad fellow-travellers dithering with their wheely bags in the lobby of the first-night airport hotel.
Passing over the women, she ear-tags the male members of the flock.
Some have females attached to them, and she eliminates these on principle: why work harder than you need to?
Prying a spouse loose can be arduous, as she discovered via her first husband: discarded wives stick like burrs.
It's the solitaries who interest her, the lurkers at the fringes.
Some of these are too old for her purposes; she avoids eye contact with them.
The ones who cherish the belief that there's life in the old dog yet: these are her game.
Not that she'll do anything about it, she tells herself, but there's nothing wrong with a little warmup practice, if only to demonstrate to herself that she can still knock one off if she wishes to.
For that evening's meet-and-greet she chooses her cream-colored pullover, perching the Magnetic Northward nametag just slightly too low on her left breast.
Thanks to Aquacize and core strength training, she's still in excellent shape for her age, or indeed for any age, at least when fully clothed and buttressed with carefully fitted underwiring.
She wouldn't want to chance a deck chair in a bikini- superficial puckering has set in, despite her best efforts- which is one reason for selecting the Arctic over, say, the Caribbean.
Her face is what it is, and certainly the best that money can buy at this stage: with a little bronzer and pale eyeshadow and mascara and glimmer powder and low lighting, she can finesse ten years.
"Though much is taken, much remains," she murmurs to her image in the mirror.
Her third husband had been a serial quotation freak with a special penchant for Tennyson.
"Come into the garden, Maud," he'd been in the habit of saying just before bedtime.
It had driven her mad at the time.
She adds a dab of cologne- an understated scent, floral, nostalgic- then she blots it off, leaving a mere whiff.
It's a mistake to overdo it: though elderly noses aren't as keen as they may once have been, it's best to allow for allergies; a sneezing man is not an attentive man.
She makes her entrance slightly late, smiling a detached but cheerful smile- it doesn't do for an unaccompanied woman to appear too eager- accepts a glass of the passable white wine they're doling out, and drifts among the assembled nibblers and sippers.
The men will be retired professionals: doctors, lawyers, engineers, stockbrokers, interested in Arctic exploration, polar bears, archeology, birds, Inuit crafts, perhaps even Vikings or plant life or geology.
Magnetic Northward attracts serious punters, with an earnest bunch of experts laid on to herd them around and lecture to them.
She's investigated the two other outfits that tour the region, but neither appeals.
One features excessive hiking and attracts the under-fifties- not her target market- and the other goes in for singsongs and dressing up in silly outfits, so she's stuck with Magnetic Northward, which offers the comfort of familiarity.
She travelled with this company once before, after the death of her third husband, five years ago, so she knows pretty much what to expect.
There's a lot of sportswear in the room, much beige among the men, many plaid shirts, vests with multiple pockets.
She notes the nametags: a Fred, a Dan, a Rick, a Norm, a Bob.
Another Bob, then another: there are a lot of Bobs on this trip.
Several appear to be flying solo.
Bob: a name once of heavy significance to her, though surely she's rid herself of that load of luggage by now.
She selects one of the thinner but still substantial Bobs, glides close to him, raises her eyelids, and lowers them again.
He peers down at her chest.
Why should she be the only one to have suffered for that night?
She'd been stupid, granted, but Bob had been vicious.
And he'd gone scot-free, without consequences or remorse, whereas her entire life had been distorted.
The Verna of the day before had died, and a different Verna had solidified in her place: stunted, twisted, mangled.
It was Bob who'd taught her that only the strong can win, that weakness should be mercilessly exploited.
It was Bob who'd turned her into- why not say the word?- a murderer.
The next morning, during the chartered flight north to where the ship is floating on the Beaufort Sea, she considers her choices.
She could play Bob like a fish right up to the final moment, then leave him cold with his pants around his ankles: a satisfaction, but a minor one.
She could avoid him throughout the trip and leave the equation where it's been for the past fifty-some years: unresolved.
Or she could kill him.
She contemplates this third option with theoretical calm.
Just say, for instance, if she were to murder Bob, how might she do it during the cruise without getting caught?
Her meds-and-sex formula would be far too slow and might not work anyway, since Bob did not appear to suffer from any ailments.
Pushing him off the ship is not a viable option.
Bob is too big, the railings are too high, and she knows from her previous trip that there will always be people on deck, enjoying the breathtaking views and taking pictures.
A corpse in a cabin would attract police and set off a search for DNA and fabric hairs and so forth, as on television.
No, she would have to arrange the death during one of the onshore visits.
But how?
Where?
She consults the itinerary and the map of the proposed route.
An Inuit settlement will not do: dogs will bark, children will follow.
As for the other stops, the land they'll be visiting is bare of concealing features.
Staff with guns will accompany them to protect against polar bears.
Maybe an accident with one of the guns?
For that she'd need split-second timing.
Whatever the method, she'd have to do it early in the voyage, before he had time to make any new friends- people who might notice he was missing.
Also, the possibility that Bob will suddenly recognize her is ever present.
And if that happens it will be game over.
Meanwhile, it would be best not to be seen with him too much.
Enough to keep his interest up, but not enough to start rumors of, for instance, a budding romance.
On a cruise, word of mouth spreads like the flu.
Once on board the ship- it's the Resolute II, familiar to Verna from her last voyage- the passengers line up to deposit their passports at Reception.
Then they assemble in the forward lounge for a talk on procedure given by three of the discouragingly capable staff members.
Every time they go ashore, the first one says with a severe Viking frown, they must turn their tags on the tag board from green to red.
When they come back to the ship, they must turn their tags back to green.
They must always wear life jackets for the Zodiac trips to shore; the life jackets are the new, thin kind that inflate once in water.
They must deposit their life jackets on the shore when landing, in the white canvas bags provided, and put them back on when departing.
If there are any tags unturned or any life jackets left in the bags, the staff will know that someone is still ashore.
They do not want to be left behind, do they?
And now a few housekeeping details.
They will find laundry bags in their cabins.
Bar bills will be charged to their accounts, and tips will be settled at the end.
The ship runs on an open-door policy, to facilitate the work of the cleaning staff, but of course they can lock their rooms if they wish.
There is a lost-and-found at Reception.
All clear?
Good.
The second speaker is the archeologist, who, to Verna, looks about twelve.
They will be visiting sites of many kinds, she says, including Independence 1, Dorset, and Thule, but they must never, never take anything.
No artifacts, and especially no bones.
Those bones might be human, and they must be very careful not to disturb them.
But even animal bones are an important source of scarce calcium for ravens and lemmings and foxes and, well, the entire food chain, because the Arctic recycles everything.
All clear?
Good.
Now, says the third speaker, a fashionably bald individual who looks like a personal trainer, a word about the guns.
Guns are essential, because polar bears are fearless.
But the staff will always fire into the air first, to scare the bear away.
Shooting a bear is a last resort, but bears can be dangerous, and the safety of passengers is the first priority.
There is no need to fear the guns: the bullets will be taken out during the Zodiac trips to and from shore, and it will not be possible for anyone to get shot.
All clear?
Good.
Clearly a gun accident won't do, Verna thinks.
No passenger is going to get near those guns.
After lunch, there's a lecture on walruses.
There are rumors of rogue walruses that prey on seals, puncturing them with their tusks, then sucking out the fat with their powerful mouths.
The women on either side of Verna are knitting.
One of them says, "Liposuction."
The other laughs.
Once the talks are over, Verna goes out on deck.
The sky is clear, with a flight of lenticular clouds hovering in it like spaceships; the air is warm; the sea is aqua.
There's a classic iceberg on the port side, with a center so blue it looks dyed, and ahead of them is a mirage- a fata morgana, towering like an ice castle on the horizon, completely real except for the faint shimmering at its edges.
Sailors have been lured to their deaths by those; they've drawn mountains on maps where no mountains were.
"Beautiful, isn't it?"
Bob says, materializing at her side.
"How about that bottle of wine tonight?"
"Stunning," Verna says, smiling.
"Perhaps not tonight- I promised some of the girls."
True enough- she's made a date with the knitting women.
"Maybe tomorrow?"
Bob grins, and shares the fact that he has a single cabin: "No. 222, like the painkiller," he quips, and comfortably amidships.
"Hardly any rock and roll at all," he adds.
Verna says that she, too, has a single: worth the extra expense, because that way you can really relax.
She draws out "relax" until it sounds like a voluptuous writhe on satin sheets.
Glancing at the tag board while strolling around the ship after dinner, Verna notes Bob's tag- close enough to her own.
Then she buys a pair of cheap gloves in the gift shop.