Owen opened a drawer in his desk, the drawer resisting with a bloodcurdling screech, and produced a bottle of Wild Turkey.
He poured a generous gulp into a cup that had CHICAGO BULLS written around it, shaking his head as if already regretting his decision.
He slurped from the cup and his face cramped, as if he'd swallowed urine, then it settled down, a little redder now, as he looked at Pronek, trying to see through him.
"So you wanna be an operative?"
"I would like to be," Pronek said.
"We don't solve big cases here.
Rich women don't make passes at us.
We don't tell off big bosses.
And we don't wake up in a ditch with a cracked head.
We just earn our daily bread doing divorces, checking backgrounds, chasing down deadbeat dads, know what I mean?
It's all work, no adventure, pays the rent.
Got it?"
"Yeah," Pronek said.
"Do you know where the Board of Education is?"
"In the downtown," Pronek said.
"Do you know where the Six Corners is?"
"No."
"Irving Park and . . . Oh, fuck it!
Do you have a car?"
"No.
But I want to buy the car."
Pronek started fidgeting in his chair.
A drop of sweat rolled down from his left armpit.
"Do you have a camera?"
"No."
"Do you know how to tail?"
"Tale?" Pronek asked, perplexed.
"You mean, tell the tale?"
Owen formed a pyramid from his hands and put its tip under his nose, then pushed his nose up a little so the bridge of his nose wrinkled.
He glared at Pronek, as if affronted by his sheer presence, curling his lips inward until his mouth was just a straight line.
Pronek wanted to tell him that he could learn, that he was really smart, that he used to be a journalist, talked to people--he could make himself over to be an operative.
But it was too late: Owen was blinking in slow motion, gathering strength to finish the interview off.
He dismantled the pyramid, unfurled his lips, and said:
"Listen, son, I like you.
I admire people like you, that's what this country's all about: the wretched refuse coming and becoming American.
My mother's family was like that, all the way from Poland.
But I ain't gonna give you a job just 'cause I like you.
Tell you what I'll do: Give me your phone and I'll call you if something comes up, okay?"
"Okay," Pronek said.
Owen was watching him, probably expecting him to get up, shake hands, and leave, but Pronek's body was suddenly heavy, and he could not get up from the sofa.
Nothing in the room moved or produced a sound.
They could hear the ill cooing of the pigeon.
"Okay," Owen repeated, as if to break the spell.
Pronek stood at the corner of Granville and Broadway, watching his breath clouding and dissolving before his eyes, waiting for Owen.
The picture-frame shop across the street had nicely framed Halloween paintings in the window--ghosts hovering over disheveled children, ghouls rising out of graves.
A man with a rotund goiter growing sideways on his neck was entering the diner on Granville.
Pronek thought that the man was growing another, smaller head and imagined a relief of a little, wicked face under the taut goiter skin.
Just in front of Pronek, a throbbing car stopped at the streetlight, inhabited by a teenager who had a shield of gold chains on his chest.
He was drumming on the wheel with his index fingers, then looked up, pointed one of his fingers at Pronek, and pretended to shoot him.
Pronek smiled, as if getting the joke, but then the teenager turned east and disappeared down Granville.
Pronek was cold; Owen was late.
A Chicago Tribune headline behind the filthy glass of a newspaper box read THOUSANDS MISSING IN SREBRENICA.
In the distance, Pronek saw a boxy Broadway bus stopping every once in a while on the empty street, sunlight shimmering in its windshield.
Owen pulled up, materializing out of nowhere, brakes screeching, right in front of Pronek.
He drove an old Cadillac that looked like the hideous offspring of a tank and a wheel cart.
Before Pronek could move toward the car, Owen honked impatiently, and the sound violated the early-morning hum, irking Pronek.
Pronek opened the door and an eddy of cigarette smoke and coffee smell escaped into the street.
Owen said nothing, put the car in gear, and drove off--a bus whizzed by, barely missing them.
He drove with both his hands on top of the wheel, alternately looking at the street and frowning at the tip of his cigarette as it was being transformed into its own ashen ghost.
Finally, the ash broke off and fell into his lap.
Owen said, as if on cue: "Damn, it's early.
But what can we do?
We gotta get this guy while he's home sleeping."
Pronek was silent, mulling over a question that would not require too many words.
They were waiting at the light on Hollywood.
The car in front of them had a bumper sticker reading: IF YOU DON'T LIKE MY DRIVING CALL 1-800-EATSHIT.
"Who is this man?" Pronek asked.
"He's a character, lemme tell you.
He's Serbian, I believe.
Been here for fifteen years or so, married an American girl, had a child, and then split after years of marriage.
He's a runaway daddy is what he is.
Couldn't find the son of a bitch, wouldn't show up in court, the lady couldn't get child support.
I gotta get him to accept the court summons, so if he doesn't show up in court, we can get cops on his ass.
Are you all like that over there, son of a bitches?"
He put out his cigarette in the ashtray already teeming with butts, a few of them falling on the floor.
Pronek imagined himself snorting up all those ashes and butts: It would be a good way to exhort a confession under torture.
He coughed nauseously.
"What are you?" Owen asked.
"It's Serbs fighting Muslims over there, right?
Are you a Serb or a Muslim?"
"I am complicated," Pronek said and retched.
The car was like a gas chamber, and Pronek felt an impulse to rise and breathe from the pocket of air just under the roof.
"You can say I'm the Bosnian."
"I don't give a damn myself, as long as you speak the same language.
You speak the same language, right?
Yugoslavian?"
"I guess," Pronek said.
"Good," Owen said.
"That's why I called you.
You get the job done, you get sixty bucks, you're a happy man."
Owen lit another cigarette, snapped his Zippo shut, and inhaled solemnly, as if inhaling a thought.
The hair island developed into a vine growing out of his forehead, nearly reaching his eyebrows.
He drove past Bryn Mawr, where a crew of crazies was already operating: a man who kept lighting matches over a bunch of cigarettes strewn on the pavement before him, muttering to himself, as if performing a recondite ritual; an old toothless woman in tights with a wet stain spreading between her thighs.
They stopped at Lawrence, then turned right.
As they were moving westward, Pronek felt the warmth of a sunbeam tickling his neck.
The windshield had thick eyebrows of dirt and a few splattered insects under them.
As if reading his mind, Owen said:
"Lemme ask you something: What's the last thing that goes through a fly's head as it hits the windshield?"
He glanced sideways at Pronek with a mischievous grin, apparently proud of his cleverness.
"What is it?" he asked again and slammed the brakes, honking violently at the car in front.
"I don't know," Pronek said.
"I should have gone the other way."
"Went," Owen said.
"What?"
"Went.
You say I should've went the other way."
He slammed the brakes again.
"But no, that's not what it is.
Think again."
"I don't know."
"It's the ass.
The last thing that goes through a fly's head as it hits the windshield is its ass."
He started laughing, nudging Pronek, until his guffawing turned into coughing and then nearly choking.
They stopped at the Clark light and he thumped his chest like a gorilla, his vine of hair quivering, his throat convulsing.
Pronek realized that there was an entire world of people he knew nothing about--the early-morning people.
Their faces had different colors in the morning sunlight.
They seemed to be comfortable so early in the morning, even if they were already tired going to work.
He could tell they had had their breakfast; their eyes were wide open, their faces developed into alertness--in contrast to Pronek's daze: the itching eyes, the tense, tired muscles, the crumpled face, the growling stomach, the pus taste in his mouth, and a general thought shortage.
The 6:00 A.M. people, the people who existed when Owen and his people were sleeping: old twiggy ladies with a plastic cover over their meticulously puffed-up hair, like wrapped-up gray lettuce heads; kids in McDonald's uniforms on their way to the morning shift, already burdened with the midday drowsihead; workers unloading crates of strawberries onto a stuck-up dolly--they all seemed to be involved in something purposeful.
Owen completed his coughing, cleared his throat confidently, and asked: "You still have family there?"
"Where?" Pronek responded, confused by a sudden change in the communication pace.
"Phnom Penh, that's where!
Wherever you're from, you still have folks there?"
"Yeah, my parents are still there.
But they're still alive."
"Now, who's trying to kill them?
I can never get this right.
Are they Muslim?"
"No," Pronek said.
"They are in Sarajevo.
Some Serbs try to kill the Muslims in Sarajevo and Bosnia, and also the people who don't want to kill the Muslims."
"You probably gonna hate this son of a bitch then."
"I don't know yet," Pronek said.
What if, he thought, what if he were dreaming this?
What if he were one of those 6:00 A.M. people, just about to wake up, slap the snooze button, and linger a few more minutes in bed?
Owen hit the brakes again, and Pronek slapped the dashboard, lest he go through the windshield.
They were at Western: A Lincoln statue was making a step forward, worried as ever, its head and shoulders dotted with dried pigeon shit.
"That son of a bitch lives around here," Owen announced.
He crossed Western, almost running over a chunky businessman who was hugging his briefcase as he scurried across the street.
They parked the car on an empty street with two rows of ochre-brick houses facing each other.
Owen adjusted his curl, adhering it to his dome.
He was looking in the rearview mirror, his hump breathing on his back, his eyes shrunk because of the fuming cigarette in his mouth.
The houses all looked the same, as if they were made in the same lousy factory.
Owen pointed at the house that had a FOR SALE sign, like a flag, in front of it.
"What I want you to do," he said, handing Pronek a grim envelope, "is to go to that door, ring the bell, and when he asks who it is, talk to him in your monkey language and give him this.
He takes it, you leave, I give you sixty bucks, we all happy.
How's that?"
"That's fine," Pronek said and wiped his sweaty palms against his pants.
He considered getting out of the car, passing the house, and running away--it would take him forty minutes to walk back to his place.
"Piece of cake," Owen said.
"Just do it."
"What is his name?" Pronek asked.
"It's Branko something.
Here, you can read it," he pointed at the envelope.
Pronek read: "Brdjanin.
It means the mountain man."
"Whatever," Owen said and excavated a gun from under his armpit--two black, perpendicular, steely rectangles, the nozzle eye glancing at Pronek.