"Nah, you probably don't need it," Owen said.
"I'll be right here, caring about you."
Pronek stepped out of the car and walked toward the house.
The number on a brass plate next to the door was 2345, and the orderliness of the digits seemed absurd against the scruffy house: blinds with holes, dusty windows, a mountain of soggy coupon sheets at the bottom of the stairs, blisters of paint on the faded-brown door with a red-letter sign reading: NO TRESPASSING in its window.
There was a squirrel sitting in an empty birdbath padded with damp leaves, watching him, with its little paws together, as if ready to applaud.
Pronek walked up the stairs to the door, clenching the envelope, his heart steadily thumping.
He pressed the hard bell-nipple and heard a muffled, deep ding-dong.
To the right, a grinning Halloween pumpkin was sagging to the porch floor.
He looked toward Owen in the car, who looked back at him over the folded Sun-Times with an eager pen in his hand.
"If this is a detective novel," Pronek thought, "I will hear shooting now."
He imagined going around the house, jumping over the wire fence, looking in, and seeing a body in the middle of a carmine puddle spreading all over the floor, a mysterious fragrance still in the air.
Then running back to Owen, only to find him with a little powder-black hole in his left temple, his hand petrified under his armpit, too slow to save him.
There was no doubt that he would have to find the killer and prove his own innocence.
He rang the bell again.
"Dobro jutro," Pronek muttered, rehearsing the first contact with Brdjanin.
"Dobro jutro. Evo ovo je za Vas."
He would give him the envelope then, Brdjanin would take it, confused by the familiarity of the language.
Piece of cake.
But then he heard keys rattling, the lock snapping, and a bare-chested man with a beard spreading down his hirsute front and a constellation of brown birthmarks on his pink dome--a man said: "What?"
Pronek stared at him paralyzed, his throat clogged with the sounds of dobro jutro.
"What you want?"
The man had a piece of lint sticking out of his navel and a cicatrix stretching across his rotund stomach.
"This is for you," Pronek garbled and handed him the envelope.
The man snatched it out of Pronek's hand, looked at it, and snorted.
Should've went the other way.
"You no understand nothing," the man said, waving the envelope in front of Pronek's face.
"I don't know," Pronek said.
"I must give this to you."
"Where you from?"
"I am," Pronek said, reluctantly, "from Ukraine."
"Oh, pravoslavni brother!" the man exclaimed.
"Come in, we drink coffee, we talk.
I explain you."
"No, thank you," Pronek uttered.
"I must go."
"Come," the man said, growled, and grabbed Pronek's arm and pulled him in.
"We drink coffee. We talk."
Pronek felt the disturbed determination of the man's fingers on his forearm.
The last thing he saw before he was sucked into the house by the man's will was Owen getting out of the car with an unhappy, worried scowl on his face.
As Pronek was walking in Brdjanin's onionesque wake, he saw a gun handle--gray with two symmetrical dots, like teeny beady eyes--peering out of his pants descending down his butt.
Brdjanin led him through a dark hall, through a couple of uncertainly closed doors, into a room that had a table in its center and five chairs summoned around it.
On the lacy tablecloth there was a pear-shaped bottle of reddish liquid with a wooden Orthodox cross in it.
"Sit," Brdjanin said.
"Here."
"I must go," Pronek uttered and sat down, facing a window.
A fly was buzzing against the windowpane, as if trying to cut through it with a minikin circular saw.
There was an icon on the wall: a sad saint with a tall forehead and a triangular beard, his head slightly tilted under the halo weight, his hands touching each other gently.
"Sit," Brdjanin said and pulled the gun out of his ass, only to slam it on the table.
The window looked out at the garden: There was a shovel sticking out of the ground like a javelin, next to a muddy hole and a mound of dirt overlooking it.
Brdjanin sat across the table from Pronek and pushed the gun aside.
"No fear.
No problem," he said, then turned toward the kitchen and yelled: "Rajka, kafu!"
He put the envelope right in front of himself, as if about to dissect it.
"We talk with coffee," he said.
A woman with a wrinkled, swollen face and a faint bruise on her cheek, like misapplied makeup, peeked out of the kitchen, pulling the flaps of her striped black-and-white bathrobe together, and then retreated.
There was a din of drawers and gas hissing, ending with an airy boom.
"You Ukrainian," Brdjanin said and leaned toward him, as if to detect Ukrainianness in his eyes.
"How is your name?"
"Pronek," Pronek said, and leaned back in his chair.
"Pronek," Brdjanin repeated.
"Good pravoslav name.
Pravoslav brothers help Serbs in war against crazy people."
Pronek looked at Brdjanin, whose beard had a smile crevice in the middle, afraid that a twitch on his face or a diverted glance would blow his feeble cover.
Brdjanin was staring at him enthusiastically, then pushed the envelope aside with contempt, leaned further toward Pronek, and asked fervently:
"You know what is this?"
"No," Pronek said.
"Is nothing," Brdjanin said and thrust his right hand forward (the gun comfortably on his left-hand side), all his fingers tight together and his thumb erect, as if he were making a wolf hand-shadow.
His thumb was a grotesque stump, like a truncated hot dog, but Pronek was cautious not to pay too much attention to it.
"You must understand," Brdjanin said. "I was fool, budala.
Wife to me was whore, was born here, but was Croat.
Fifteen years.
Fifteen years!
I go see her brothers, they want to kill me."
He made the motion of cutting his throat with the thumb stump, twice, as if they couldn't kill him in the first try.
"They Ustashe, want to cut my head because I Serb.
Is war now, no more wife, no more brothers. My woman is Serb now, you brother to me now.
I trust only pravoslav people now.
Other people, other people . . ."
He shook his head, signifying suspicion, and pulled his thumb across his throat again.
Pronek nodded automatically, helpless.
He wanted to say that Croats are just like everyone else: good people and bad people, or some reasonable platitude like that, but in this room whatever it was he used to think just an hour ago seemed ludicrous now.
He wanted the woman to be in the room with him, as if she could protect him from Brdjanin's madness and his cutthroat thumb stump.
The room reeked of coffee and smoke, stale sweat and Vegeta, a coat of torturous, sleepless nights over everything.
The woman trudged out of the kitchen and put a tray with a coffeepot and demitasse between the two of them, and then dragged her feet back, as if she were ready to collapse.
Pronek looked after her longingly, but Brdjanin didn't notice.
"This Serbian coffee.
They say Turkish coffee.
It's Serbian coffee," Brdjanin said, lit a cigarette, and let two smoke-snakes out of his nostrils.
Pronek imagined saving the woman from this lair, taking her home (wherever it may be), and taking care of her until she recovered and regained her beauty, slouching somewhere in her heart now--and he would ask for nothing in return.
Brdjanin slurped some coffee from his demitasse, then reached behind his chair and produced a newspaper.
The headline said: THOUSANDS MISSING IN SREBRENICA.
"Missing?" Brdjanin cried.
"No missing.
Is war.
They kill, they killed.
No missing."
He threw the paper across the table and it landed right in front of Pronek, so he had to look at it: a woman clutching her teary face wrapped in a colorless scarf, as if trying to unscrew her head.
"Hmm," Pronek said, only because he thought silence might be conspicuous.
"You know what is this?"
Brdjanin asked and spurted out an excited flock of spit drops.
"You know?"
"Nothing," Pronek mumbled.
"No, is not nothing. Is Muslim propaganda."
"Oh," Pronek said.
Where was Owen?
If Owen broke in now, taking out Brdjanin as he was trying to reach his gun, Pronek would run to the kitchen, grab the woman's hand, and escape with her.
"Come with me," he would say. "Podji sa mnom."
"You know when bomb fall on market in Sarajevo?"
Brdjanin asked, frowning and refrowning, sweat collecting in the furrows.
"They say hundred people die.
They all dolls, lutke.
Muslims throw bomb on market.
Propaganda!
Then they put dolls for television, it look bad, like many people killed."
Pronek's mother had barely missed the shell.
She had just crossed the street when it landed.
She wandered back, dazed, and trudged through bloody pulp, torn limbs hanging off the still-standing counters, shell-shocked people slipping on brains.
She almost stepped on someone's heart, she said, but it was a tomato--what a strange thing, she thought, a tomato.
She hadn't seen a tomato for a couple of years.
"I have the friend," Pronek said, trying to appear disinterested, his heart throttling in his chest, "from Sarajevo.
He says the people really died.
His parents are in Sarajevo.
They saw it."
"What is he?"
"He's the Bosnian."
"No, what is he?
He is Muslim?
He is Muslim.
He lie."
"No, he's not Muslim.
He is from Sarajevo."
"He is from Sarajevo, he is Muslim.
They want Islamic Republic, many mudjahedini."
Pronek slurped his coffee.
The gun lay on the left-hand side, comfortably stretched like a sleeping dog--he wouldn't have been surprised if the gun scratched its snout with its trigger.
Pronek could see the woman's shadow moving around the kitchen.
Brdjanin sighed and put both of his hands on the table, pounding it slowly as he spoke:
"How long you been here?
I been here twenty years.
Leave my parents, my sister.
I come here.
Good country, good people.
I work in factory, twenty years.
But not my country.
I die for my country.
American die for his country.
You die for Ukraine.
We all die.
Is war."
Pronek looked out and saw Owen getting around the shovel, the paper and pen still in his hands, almost falling into the hole.
Owen looked up to the window, saw Pronek, and nodded upward, asking if everything was all right.
Pronek quickly looked at Brdjanin, who was looking at his hand, gently hacking the table surface, muttering: "I Serb, no nothing."
"I must go," Pronek said. "I must go to work."
"You go," Brdjanin shrugged and stroked his beard.
"No problem."
Pronek stood up.
Brdjanin put his hand on the gun.
Pronek walked toward the door.
Brdjanin held the gun casually, no finger near the trigger.
Pronek opened the door, Brdjanin behind him.
It was the bathroom: A radiator was wheezing, a cat-litter box underneath was full of sandy lumps.
As Pronek was turning around, slowly, Brdjanin grasped Pronek's jacket, his left hand still holding the gun, and looked at him: He was shorter than Pronek, with an exhausted, yeasty smell; his eyes were moist green.
Pronek nodded meaninglessly, paralyzed with fear.
Brdjanin bowed his head, saying nothing.
Pronek could see the woman framed by the kitchen door, watching them.
He looked at her, hoping she would come and save him from Brdjanin's grasp.
She would come and embrace him and say it was all okay.
But she was not moving, as if she were used to seeing men in a clinch.
She had her hands in her robe pockets, but then took out a cigarette and a lighter.
She lit the cigarette, and Pronek saw the lighter flame flickering with uncanny clarity.