Desert Breakdown, 1968
Krystal was asleep when they crossed the Colorado.
Mark had promised to stop for some pictures, but when the moment came he looked over at her and drove on.
Krystal's face was puffy from the heat blowing into the car.
Her hair, cut short for summer, hung damp against her forehead. Only a few strands lifted in the breeze.
She had her hands folded over her belly and that made her look even more pregnant than she was.
The tires sang on the metal grillwork of the bridge.
The river stretched away on both sides, blue as the empty sky.
Mark saw the shadow of the bridge on the water with the car running through the girders, and the glint of water under the grillwork.
Then the tires went silent.
California, Mark thought, and for a time he felt almost as good as he had expected to feel.
But it soon passed.
He had broken his word, and he was going to hear about it when Krystal woke up.
He almost turned the car around. But he didn't want to have to stop, and hoist Hans up on his shoulders, and watch Krystal point that camera at him again.
By now Krystal had hundreds of pictures of Mark, Mark with Hans on his shoulders standing in front of canyons and waterfalls and monumental trees and the three automobiles they'd owned since coming Stateside.
Mark did not photograph well.
For some reason he always looked discouraged. But those pictures gave the wrong idea.
An old platoon sergeant of Mark's had an expression he liked to use- "free, white, and twenty-one."
Well, that was an exact description of Mark.
Everything was in front of him. All he needed was an opening.
Two hawks wheeled overhead, their shadows immense on the baking grey sand.
A spinning funnel of dust moved across the road and disappeared behind a billboard.
The billboard had a picture of Eugene McCarthy on it.
McCarthy's hair was blowing around his head. He was grinning.
The caption below said, "A Breath of Fresh Air."
You could tell this was California because in Arizona a McCarthy billboard would last about five minutes.
This one had bullet holes in it, but in Arizona someone would have burned it down or blown it up.
The people there were just incredibly backward.
In the distance the mountains were bare and blue.
Mark passed exit signs for a town called Blythe.
He considered stopping for some gas, but there was still half a tank and he did not want to risk waking Krystal or Hans.
He drove on into the desert.
They would make Los Angeles by dinnertime.
Mark had an army buddy there who'd offered to put them up for as long as they wanted to stay.
He was house-sitting for his parents while they made up their minds whether to get divorced or not.
Mark was sure he'd find something interesting in Los Angeles. Something in the entertainment field.
He had been in plays all through high school and could sing pretty well. But his big talent was impersonation.
He could mimic anybody.
In Germany he had mimicked a Southern fellow in his company so accurately that after a couple of weeks of it the boy asked to be transferred to another unit.
Mark knew he'd gone overboard. He laid off and in the end the boy withdrew his request for transfer.
His best impersonation was his father, Dutch.
Sometimes, just for fun, Mark called his mother and talked to her in Dutch's slow, heavy voice, rolling every word along on treads, like a tank.
She always fell for it.
Mark would go on until he got bored, then say something like, "By the way, Dottie, we're bankrupt."
Then she would catch on and laugh.
Unlike Dutch, she had a sense of humor.
A truck hurtled past.
The sound of the engine woke Hans, but Mark reached into the back and rubbed the satin edge of the baby blanket against Hans's cheek.
Hans put his thumb in his mouth. Then he stuck his rear end in the air and went back to sleep.
The road shimmered. It seemed to float above the desert floor.
Mark sang along with the radio, which he had been turning up as the signal grew weaker.
Suddenly it blared.
He turned it down, but he was too late.
Hans woke up again and started fussing.
Mark rubbed his cheek with the blanket.
Hans pushed Mark's arm away and said, "No!"
It was the only word he knew.
Mark glanced back at him.
He'd been sleeping on a toy car and the wheels had left four red dents on the side of his face.
Mark stroked his cheek.
"Pretty soon," he said, "pretty soon, Hansy," not meaning anything in particular but wanting to sound upbeat.
Krystal was awake now too.
For a moment she didn't move or say anything. Then she shook her head rapidly from side to side.
"So hot," she said.
She held up the locket-watch around her neck and looked at Mark.
He kept his eyes on the road.
"Back from the dead," he said. "Boy, you were really out."
"The pictures," she said. "Mark, the pictures."
"There wasn't any place to stop," he said.
"But you promised."
Mark looked at her, then back at the road.
"I'm sorry," he said. "There'll be other rivers."
"I wanted that one," Krystal said, and turned away.
Mark could tell that she was close to tears.
It made him feel tired.
"All right," he said. "Do you want me to go back?"
He slowed the car to prove he meant it.
"If that's what you want just say the word."
She shook her head.
Mark sped up.
Hans began to kick the back of the seat.
Mark didn't say anything.
At least it was keeping Hans busy and quiet.
"Hey, gang," Mark said. "Listen up. I've got ten big ones that say we'll be diving into Rick's pool by six o'clock."
Hans gave the seat a kick that Mark felt clear through to his ribs.
"Ten big ones," Mark said. "Any takers?"
He looked over at Krystal and saw that her lips were trembling.
He patted the seat beside him.
She hesitated, then slid over and leaned against him, as he knew she would.
Krystal was not one to hold a grudge.
He put his arm around her shoulder.
"So much desert," she said.
"It's something, all right."
"No trees," she said. "At home I could never imagine."
Hans stopped kicking. Then, without warning, he grabbed Mark's ears.
Krystal laughed and pulled him over the seat onto her lap.
He immediately arched his back and slid down to the floor, where he began to tug at the gear shift.
"I have to stop," Krystal said.
She patted her belly.
"This one likes to sit just so, here, on my bladder."
Mark nodded.
Krystal knew the English words for what Dottie had always been content to call her plumbing, and when she was pregnant she liked to describe in pretty close detail what went on in there. It made Mark queasy.
"Next chance we get," he said. "We're low anyway."
Mark turned off at an exit with one sign that said GAS.
There was no mention of a town.
The road went north over bleached hardpan crazed with fissures.
It seemed to be leading them toward a solitary mountain far away that looked to Mark like a colossal sinking ship.
Phantom water glistened in the desert.
Rabbits darted back and forth across the road.
Finally they came to the gas station, an unpainted cement-block building with some pickup trucks parked in front.
Mark pulled in.
There were four men sitting on a bench in the shade of the building.
They watched the car come toward them.
"Cowboys," Krystal said. "Look, Hans, cowboys!"
Hans stood on Krystal's legs and looked out the window.
Krystal still thought that everyone who wore a cowboy hat was a cowboy.
Mark had tried to explain that it was a style, but she refused to understand.
He drove up to a pump and turned off the engine.
The four men stared at them.
Their faces were dark under the wide brims of their hats.
They looked as if they had been there forever.
One of the men got up from the bench and walked over.
He was tall and carried a paunch that seemed out of place on his bony frame.
He bent down and looked inside the car.
He had little black eyes with no eyebrows.
His face was red, as if he were angry about something.
"Regular, please," Mark said. "All she'll take."
The man stared openly at Krystal's belly.
He straightened up and walked away, past the men on the bench, up to the open door of the building. He stuck his head inside and yelled. Then he sat on the bench again.
The man next to him looked down and mumbled something.
The others laughed.
Somebody else in a cowboy hat came out of the building and went around to the back of the car.
"Mark," Krystal said.
"I know," Mark said. "The bathroom."
He got out of the car.
The heat took him by surprise; he could feel it coming down like rain.
The person pumping gas said, "You need oil or anything?" and that was when Mark realized it was a woman.
She was looking down at the nozzle, so he couldn't see her face, only the top of her hat.
Her hands were black with grease.
"My wife would like to use your bathroom," he said.
She nodded.
When the tank was full she thumped on the roof of the car.
"Okay," she said, and walked toward the building.
Krystal opened the door.
She swung her legs out, then rocked forward and pushed herself up into the light.
She stood for a moment, blinking.
The four men looked at her.
So did Mark.
He made allowances for the fact that Krystal was pregnant, but she was still too heavy.
Her bare arms were flushed from the heat. So was her face.
She looked like one of those stein-slinging waitresses in the Biergarten where she and Mark used to drink.
He wished that these fellows could have seen the way Krystal looked wearing that black dress of hers, with her hair long, when they'd first started going out together.
Krystal shaded her eyes with one hand. With the other hand she pulled her blouse away from where it stuck to her skin.
"More desert," she said.
She lifted Hans out of the car and began to carry him toward the building, but he kicked free and ran over to the bench.
He stood there in front of the men, naked except for his diaper.
"Come here," Krystal said.
When he didn't obey she started toward him, then looked at the men and stopped.
Mark went over.
"Let's go, Hansy," he said.
He picked Hans up, and felt a sudden tenderness that vanished when Hans began to struggle.
The woman took Krystal and Hans inside the building, then came out and sat on the pile of scrap lumber beside the door.
"Hans," she said. "That's a funny name for a little boy."
"It was her father's name," Mark said, and so it was.
The original Hans had died shortly before the baby was born.
Otherwise Mark never would have agreed.
Even Germans didn't name their kids Hans anymore.
One of the men flicked a cigarette butt toward Mark's car.
It fell just short and lay there, smoldering.
Mark took it as a judgment on the car.
It was a good car, a 1958 Bonneville he'd bought two weeks ago when the Ford started to smoke, but a previous owner had put a lot of extra chrome on it and right now it was gleaming every which way.
It looked foolish next to these dented pickups with their gun racks and dull, blistering paint.
Mark wished he'd tanked up in Blythe.