Mark had assumed that when he reached the highway someone would immediately pick him up.
But car after car went by, and the few drivers who looked at him scowled as if they were angry with him for needing a ride and putting them on the spot.
Mark's face burned, and his throat was so dry it hurt to swallow.
Twice he had to leave the road to stand in the shade of a billboard.
Cars passed him by for more than an hour, cars from Wisconsin and Utah and Georgia and just about everywhere.
Mark felt like the whole country had turned its back on him.
The thought came to him that he could die out here.
Finally a car stopped.
It was a hearse.
Mark hesitated, then ran toward it.
There were three people in the front seat, a man between two women.
There was no rear seat.
The space in back was full of electrical equipment.
Mark pushed some wires out of his way and sat cross-legged on the floor.
He felt the breeze from the air conditioner; it was like a stream of cold water running over him.
The driver pulled back onto the road.
"Welcome to the stiffmobile," said the man beside her.
He turned around.
His head was shaved except for one bristling stripe of hair down the center.
It was the first Mohawk haircut Mark had ever seen.
The man's eyebrows were the same carroty color as his hair.
He had freckles. The freckles covered his entire face and even the shaved parts of his skull.
"Stiffmobile, cliffmobile," said the woman driving. "Riff-mobile."
"Bet you thought you'd be riding with a cold one," the man said.
Mark shrugged.
"I'd rather ride with a cold one than a hot one."
The man laughed and pounded on the back of the seat.
The two women also laughed.
The one not driving turned around and looked at Mark.
She had a round, soft-looking face. Her lips were full. She wore a small gold earring in one side of her nose.
"Speaking of cold ones," the man said, "there's a case of them right behind you."
Mark fished a can of beer out of the cooler.
He took a long swallow, head back, eyes closed.
When he opened his eyes again the man with the Mohawk was watching him.
They introduced themselves, all but the woman driving.
She never looked at Mark or spoke, except to herself.
The man with the Mohawk was Barney. The girl with the earring was Nance.
They joked back and forth, and Mark discovered that Nance had a terrific sense of humor.
She picked up on almost everything he said.
After a while the earring in her nose ceased to bother him.
When Barney heard that Mark had been in the army he shook his head.
"Pass on that," he said. "No bang-bang for Barney.
I can't stand the sight of my own brains."
"Trains," the driver said. "Cranes, lanes, stains."
"Smoothe out," Barney told her.
He turned back to Mark.
"So what was it like over there?"
Mark realized that Barney meant Vietnam.
Mark had not been to Vietnam.
He'd had orders to go, but the orders were killed just before he left and never reissued.
He didn't know why.
It was too complicated to explain, so he just said, "Pretty bad," and left it at that.
The mention of Vietnam broke the good feeling between them.
They drank their beers and looked at the desert passing by.
Then Barney crumpled his can and threw it out the window.
Hot air blew into Mark's face.
He remembered what it was like out there, and felt glad to be right where he was.
"I could get behind another beer," Nance said.
"Right," Barney said.
He turned around and told Mark to pop some more frosties.
While Mark was getting the cans out of the cooler Barney watched him, playing his fingers over the top of the seat as if it were a keyboard.
"So what's in Blythe?" he said.
"Smythe," the driver said. "Smythe's in Blythe."
"Be cool," Nance said to her.
"I need a part," Mark said.
He handed out the beers.
"An alternator.
My car's on the fritz."
"Where's your car?" Barney said.
Mark jerked his thumb over his shoulder.
"Back there. I don't know the name of the place.
It's just this gas station off the highway." Nance was looking at him.
She kept watching him.
"Hey," she said. "What if you didn't stop smiling?
What if you just kept smiling and never stopped?"
Barney looked at her. Then he looked back at Mark.
"To me," he said, "there are places you go and places you don't go.
You don't go to Rochester.
You don't go to Blythe."
"You definitely don't go to Blythe," Nance said.
"Right," Barney said. Then he listed some of the places where, in his opinion, you do go.
They were going to one of them now, San Lucas, up in the mountains above Santa Fe.
They were part of a film crew shooting a Western there.
They had shot another movie in the same place a year ago and this was the sequel.
Barney was a sound man. Nance did make-up.
They didn't say anything about the driver.
"The place is unbelievable," Barney said.
He paused and shook his head.
Mark was waiting for him to describe San Lucas, but Barney just shook his head again and said, "The place is completely unbelievable."
"Really," Nance said.
It turned out that the star of the picture was Nita Damon.
This was a real coincidence, because Mark had seen Nita Damon about six months ago in a show in Germany, a Bob Hope Christmas Special.
"That's amazing," Nance said.
She and Barney looked at each other.
"You should scratch Blythe," Barney said.
Mark grinned.
Nance was staring at him.
"Marco," she said. "You're not a Mark, you're a Marco."
"You should sign on with us," Barney said. "Ride the stiffmobile express."
"You should," Nance said. "San Lucas is just incredible."
"Partyville," Barney said.
"Jesus," Mark said. "No. I couldn't."
"Sure you could," Barney said. "Lincoln freed the slaves, didn't he?
Get your car later."
Mark was laughing.
"Come on," he said. "What would I do up there?"
Barney said, "You mean like work?"
Mark nodded.
"No problem," Barney said.
He told Mark that there was always something to do.
People didn't show up, people quit, people got sick- there was always a call out for warm bodies.
Once you found a tasty spot, you just settled in.
"You mean I'd be working on the movie?
On the film crew?"
"Absitively," Barney said. "I guarantee."
"Jesus," Mark said.
He took a breath. He looked at Barney and Nance.
"I don't know," he said.
"That's all right," Barney said. "I know."
"Barney knows," Nance said.
"What have you got to lose?" Barney said.
Mark didn't say anything. He took another breath.
Barney watched him.
"Marco," he said. "Don't tell me- you've got a little something else back there besides the car, right?"
When Mark didn't answer, Barney laughed.
"That's mellow," he said. "You're among friends."
"I have to think," Mark said.
"Okay," Barney said. "Think. You've got till Blythe."
He turned around.
"Don't disappoint me," he said.
Nance smiled. Then she turned around too.
The top of her head was just visible over the high seat-back.
The desert went past the window, always the same.
The road had an oily look.
Mark felt rushed, a little wild.
His first idea was to get the directions to San Lucas, then drive up with Krystal and Hans after the car was fixed.
But that wouldn't work.
He wouldn't have enough money left for the gas, let alone food and motels and a place to live once they got there.
He'd miss his chance.
Because that's what this was- a chance.
There was no point in fooling himself.
He could go to Los Angeles and walk the streets for months, years maybe, without ever getting anywhere.
He could stand outside closed doors and suck up to nobodies and sit in plastic chairs half his life without ever coming close to where he was right now, on his way to a guaranteed job in Partyville.
Los Angeles wasn't going to work.
Mark could see that.
He'd borrow money from his friend and start hustling and he wouldn't get the time of day from anyone, because he was hungry, and nobody ever had time for hungry people.
Hungry people got written off.
It was like Dutch said- them as has, gets.
He would run himself ragged and the money would disappear, the way all his other money had disappeared.
Krystal would get worried and sad.
After a couple of weeks Mark and his buddy wouldn't have anything to say to each other, and his buddy would get tired of living with a guy he didn't really know that well and a yelling kid and a sad, pregnant woman.
He would tell Mark some lie to get rid of them- his girl was moving in, his parents had decided to stay together after all.
By then Mark would be broke again.
Krystal would have a fit and probably go into labor.
What if that happened? What then?
Mark knew what. Crawl home to Dutch and Dottie.
No. No sir.
The only way he was going back to Phoenix was in a coffin.
The driver started talking to herself.
Barney rapped her on top of the head with his knuckles.
"Do you want me to drive?" he said.
It sounded like a threat.
She quieted down.
"All right," he said.
Without looking back he said, "Five miles to Blythe."
Mark looked out the window.
He couldn't get it out of his mind that here he had exactly what he needed. A chance to show what he was made of.
He'd have fun, sure, but he'd also be at work on time in the morning.
He would do what he was told and do it right.
He would keep his eyes open and his mouth shut and after a while people would start to notice him.
He wouldn't push too hard, but now and then he might do a song at one of the parties, or impersonate some of the actors.
He could just hear Nita Damon laughing and saying, "Stop it, Mark! Stop it!"
What he could do, Mark thought, was to call Krystal and arrange to meet up with her at his buddy's house in a month or two, after they'd shot the film.
Mark would have something going then. He'd be on his way.
But that wouldn't work, either.
He didn't know how to call her.
She had no money. And she wouldn't agree.
Mark wasn't going to fool himself.
If he left Krystal and Hans back there, she would never forgive him.
If he left them, he left them for good.
I can't do that, Mark thought.
But he knew this wasn't true.
He could leave them.
People left one another, and got left, every day.
It was a terrible thing. But it happened and people survived, as they survived worse things.
Krystal and Hans would survive, too.
When she understood what had happened she would call Dutch.
Dutch would hit the roof, but in the end he would come through for them.
He didn't have any choice.
And in four or five years what happened today would be nothing but a bad memory.
Krystal would do well for herself.
Men liked her.
Even Dutch liked her, though he'd been dead set against the marriage.
She would meet a good man someday, a man who could take care of her.
She and Hans and the new baby would be able to go to sleep at night without wondering what would happen to them when they woke up.