An Abduction
She carried the Jokari set down through the patch of woodland toward the bottom of the garden.
Her sister, Frances, dark-skinned and fey, not at all like their mother and not yet old enough for boarding school, had chums around to play with.
They were supposed to be clearing the drive of rabbit droppings with spoons and plastic bags, for money, but they were all four hunkered in a semicircle under the pine trees, where they had set out tea things for their dolls, a pinecone on each tiny plate, a rabbit dropping in each tiny cup.
Jane heard Frances chanting in two alternating voices while the others watched, in thrall to her.
¡°Don¡¯t want it! Don¡¯t want it!¡± Frances said in her whiny voice.
¡°Eat it up,¡± her vicious voice replied. ¡°Take your nasty medicine.¡±
Kicking off her flip-flops, she settled resignedly into her game.
The pock and thud of the Jokari ball on the baked ground soothed her, and she started to care about whether she could break her own record of consecutive hits. (She had passed Robin's record long ago.)
Rapt, she didn't notice her father steering the Rover down the drive, on his way out to pick up the Saturday paper; to save petrol, he liked to roll down with the hand brake off, starting the engine only when he turned into the road.
Jane scooped low to the ground under an awkward shot, getting it up with too much force just as the sleek black of the car eased into the edge of her vision; the ball on its elastic must have seemed smashed deliberately and vindictively against the car's side window (which luckily was not open).
Assaulted amid his reverie, Mr. Allsop was outraged out of all proportion to the offense- nothing was broken.
He stopped the car and half stood up out of it to rant across its roof at Jane: Stupid girl!
Didn't she have anything better to do?
Then the car rolled on, ominously firing to life when it felt the road, and Jane was left wounded, staring after it.
The wings of her spirit, which had been beginning to soar, faltered and flung her to earth, because, after all, she had been doing her best, nothing else; and also because her father was supposed to be her ally in the family, though they weren't at all alike.
Mr. Allsop was small and dark, like Frances, easily bored, and clever with figures.
He thought about Jane vaguely, through a fog of fond concern, fearing that she had her mother's flat, bland surface without Mrs. Allsop's force of conviction- or whatever it was that kept her impermeable, buoyant.
Jane dropped her paddle in an uncharacteristic gesture of despair. Tears stung her eyes; she stood with her hands by her sides, palms outward, in a kind of resigned openness.
What next, then, if even her attempt at virtue had failed?