And that was how they first saw her.
They passed Mr. Allsop in the Rover; he was turning out of the unmade-up road just as they turned into it.
Mr. Allsop noticed them, because he knew most of the cars that visited the road, and he didn't recognize or much like the look of this one: an expensive dark-green sporty two-seater convertible, with one long-haired youth in a sloppy vest lolling in each seat, and one- smoking something that might have been more sinister than a cigarette- squeezed into the little luggage space behind, craning forward, as he was bound to, between his friends.
The driver, who had one languid hand on the wheel, cornered carelessly in a puff of chalk dust, tires spitting loose stones.
(If they were my kids, Mr. Allsop thought, catch me allowing them anywhere near my car.
It's not all bad that Robin's such a drip.)
Had the family ever realized that Jane had been abducted, her father would probably have remembered and suspected these visiting aliens.
The boys were drunk and stoned, and hadn't been to bed at all the night before (but then they hadn't got out of bed until four the previous afternoon).
They were out looking for girls, in Nigel's father's car. (Nigel was the one squeezed into the luggage space.)
They'd finished their second year at Oxford and were staying at Nigel's house, about a twenty-minute drive from the Allsops', while his parents were away in France.
After sagging at dawn, dozing in the angular Swedish armchairs in the lounge, and filling Nigel's mother's fashionable ashtrays while listening to the Grateful Dead, all three had found a second wind, swimming several thrashing lengths in Nigel's pool.
The loveliness of the morning had then seemed their own fresh discovery: the light as limpid as the water, birdsong skimming the flat echoless air, the sun's touch intricate on their skin.
They had decided that they needed to find girls to crown the day. That was a few hours ago.
It had taken them a while to get started; and then there'd been a striking absence, everywhere they'd driven, of available girls.
"She'll do," one of them called out when they saw Jane, loud enough for her to hear.
It was Paddy (not Irish at all), the bulky, clever-looking one in the passenger seat, with small eyes like chinks of bright glass and greasy hair the color and texture of old rope, pushed behind pink ears.
He took the joint from Nigel and blinked at Jane through its smoke with a sort of appraising impartial severity, not lascivious.
"But where will we put these girls?"
Nigel asked facetiously, after one glance at Jane: he didn't fancy sharing his small space (and wasn't, in fact, much interested in girls).
Paddy explained that they'd have to collect them one at a time.
Jane stood barefoot, hands still open in that gesture of self-relinquishment.
She wasn't plain in that moment, though she didn't know it.
Something was revealed in her that was normally hidden: an auburn light in her face, her freckles startling as the camouflage of an animal, blotting up against her lips and eyelids.
There were ginger glints, too, in her hair, which she wore in two bunches, fastened with different-colored elastic bands.
Her eyes with their pale lashes, because she was unhappy, communicated keenly.
Her family called her pudgy, but she just looked soft, as if she were longing to nestle.
Her jawline was pure, the pale lips rather full, cracked, parted.
She seemed not fake or stuck up- and, just then in the dappled light, not a child, either.
None of this was wasted on the boys.
It didn't occur to Jane that the car would stop for her; she watched it hungrily, sifting the silky dust between her toes.
Daniel, the driver, Jane saw at once, was the best-looking of the three; in fact, he was crushingly beautiful- his features smudged and vivid at once, as if sketched in black ink- and her heart fastened on him.
When he had stopped the car, he asked her what her name was and she told him.
"Want to come for a ride?" he said kindly.
She hesitated only for a moment.
"Not in the back," she said, quite clear about it. Already, she didn't care for Nigel.
"Between us in the front," Paddy said, squeezing over.
And so she climbed in, carrying her flip-flops in her hand.
On a whim, she had decided against shorts that morning; she was wearing a washed-out old dress in flowered cotton, with a Peter Pan collar.
On their way back to Nigel's house, Jane was an accomplice in an episode of shoplifting- which fortunately went undetected, or at least unreported.
She had never stolen anything before; the possibility hadn't crossed her mind.
But she was disoriented: as they drove along, Paddy had pulled the elastic bands off her two bunches so that her hair blew crazily into all their faces.
Whipping across her vision, the strands of it were like a hallucination, distracting her from her larger bewilderment at half sitting on Paddy's knee, feeling Daniel ease his arm around her once, on a straight stretch when he wasn't changing gears.
(Nigel's father had chosen a manual gearbox on the M.G.C.) "It's all right," Daniel had said. "Don't worry about us. We're not all bad."
"I like her," Paddy commented. "She doesn't talk too much."
The oddest thing was that she wasn't worrying, although she knew she ought to be; especially when they made plans to keep the shopkeeper talking while she, Jane, slipped bottles of whatever alcohol she could get into their canvas haversack.
"He keeps it in a little side room," Daniel said. "You don't look as if you drink, so no one will suspect you.
If they do, you can cry and say that we kidnapped you and made you do it."
Jane didn't recognize the shop, though it was only a few miles from her home; her mother had most of their groceries delivered, and, anyway, Mrs. Allsop would never have shopped in such a dimly lit, cellar-smelling place, its windows hung with conflicting advertisements for cigarettes and tea, its shelves crowded promiscuously with faded tins, china souvenirs, regiments of sweet jars.
A naked fat ham in orange bread crumbs jostled for space on the counter with packets of parsley sauce and marked-down broken biscuits.
Repulsion at the ham's sickly flesh smell fuelled Jane's impossible swift acts.
She chose the cool bottles by feel in the dark little off-license nook, beyond a curtain of plastic strips, because she could hardly see in there; her eyes were dazzled from the light outside.
Her heart thudded as violently as an engine stalling, but her hands were sure.
The boys paid for the sliced bread and tomatoes and tin of tuna they bought, thanking the shopkeeper loftily as they left.
Jane sat in the car again between them, her trophies chinking on her knee.
"Isn't she good?"
Paddy said when they'd driven on and he'd excavated in the haversack, finding dusty Mateus rose and Johnnie Walker and several bottles of barley wine.
"She's a natural," Daniel said.
"Now she belongs to us," Paddy said. "We've got the dirt on her."
Jane sought in the recesses of her consciousness the remorse that she knew ought to be lying in wait- that poor honest shopkeeper, struggling to make a living!
But it was as if all recesses had flattened out for the moment, into a balmy infinite present amid the sunshine and the gusts and swirls of wind as the M.G.C. swerved around bends.
Her consciousness was filled to the brim with her contact- astonishing because she was so virgin in contacts- with the boys' warm bodies, lapping against her; she didn't even much mind Nigel's chin resting showily on her shoulder, when he leaned over from his perch in the back.
It had never occurred to her, until now, that the masculine- a suspect realm of deep-voiced otherness, beard growth, fact-authority, and bathroom smells- could be so intimately important, in relation to herself; it seemed as improbable as two planets colliding.
Nigel had a bottle opener on his key ring, and they started on the barley wine, after a discussion with Jane over whether she drank alcohol or not.
"I don't," she owned up candidly. "But I might start."
Daniel, solicitous, said that they mustn't give her too much, just a little sip at a time.
They watched her face to see whether she liked the taste and laughed delightedly when it was obvious that she didn't, although she bravely insisted ("I do! I do quite like it!"), as entertained as if they were feeding beer to a puppy.