Another Life
A husband and wife drive to Boston.
The husband is sick.
He takes extra-strong cold medication just before getting into the car, and all the way to Boston he worries that he is going to fall asleep at the wheel and crash into the median.
Or maybe the husband secretly wants to crash rather than go to his father-in-law's birthday party, which is what he and his wife are driving to Boston for.
Anyway, he manages to stay awake, and they arrive at their hotel.
It is just off the highway, a boutique hotel that got excellent reviews on the Internet.
The husband and wife check in, they put on nice clothes, they go to the party.
A couple of hours later, the husband drives back to the hotel alone.
He changes into pajamas and gets into bed.
He picks up Rousseau's "Discourse on the Origin of Inequality," the book he brought to read on this trip.
"Nature commands every animal and the beast obeys," Rousseau writes, or wrote, in the eighteenth century.
"Man feels the same impulsion, but knows that he is free to acquiesce or resist."
At this point, the husband realizes that he doesn't want to spend the night reading Rousseau in bed, alone.
He thinks about going downstairs to the hotel bar.
It's the kind of thing he never does- but ten minutes later there he is, sitting at the bar, reading his book.
The husband is not trying to pick anyone up.
His wife will be back in an hour or two, and besides, who would dream of picking someone up with Rousseau?
Of all the authors you could try to pick someone up with, Rousseau is probably the worst.
Or maybe Kant.
The husband orders a hot toddy.
The bartender, an attractive young woman with crinkly black hair, brings him the drink and they exchange remarks about it.
Yes, it's perfect, the husband says.
Good, I'm glad.
The bartender smiles.
The husband reads some more Rousseau.
Upstairs, in his room, he was really understanding the Second Discourse, but down here at the bar he finds it hard to concentrate.
The pretty bartender is scooping ice from the ice chest, and the husband can see her cleavage, maybe even the top of her bra.
She goes away, comes back, scoops more ice.
Finally, the husband asks her how it's going.
It's going well, the pretty bartender says.
What are you reading?
Oh, the husband says, embarrassed, it's Rousseau.
For all his thinking about books and picking people up, he is totally unprepared to talk about the "Origin of Inequality" with the pretty bartender.
Fortunately, she doesn't ask about it.
I love to read, she says.
I read just about anything.
Really, the husband says, pleased.
Who are your favorite authors?
My favorite author is Emily Dickinson, the pretty bartender says.
The husband is caught off guard.
He has read some Emily Dickinson but not for a long time, and now he can't remember a single one of her poems.
Ah, the bard of Amherst, he says.
The pretty bartender, sensing the husband's discomfort, willingly moves on.
I'm taking a fiction class in college, she says.
I don't have to, it's not required for my major, but I wanted to take it anyway.
We read short stories.
By who?
the husband asks.
Despite his spotty knowledge of Emily Dickinson, the husband thinks of himself as well read.
We're reading one now by Kate Chopin, the pretty bartender says.
It's called "The Story of an Hour."
Sadly, the husband must admit that he has not read this story.
She's awesome, the bartender says. There's apparently a novel by her?
"The Awakening," the husband says.
Have you read it? the bartender asks.
No, not that, either, he says.
The husband then recommends Flannery O'Connor, and the bartender makes a show of writing the name down on a strip of register tape.
I love the grotesque, the husband says.
What's that? the bartender asks.
It's when you deform life to get at some idea behind it, the husband says.
Behind life? the bartender asks.
Yes, an idea behind life, like the last judgment of the soul, or Heaven and Hell.
Which one would this be? the bartender asks, smiling, and the husband says, This bar? Purgatory would be my guess.
Huh, the pretty bartender says.
Just as they seem to be getting somewhere, though, the husband makes the conversationally suicidal move of bringing up Emily Dickinson again.
She's completely singular, he says. There's no one like her!
There is sweat on his brow, which runs almost to the top of his head.
Yeah, the bartender says, and that's the end of that.
The husband returns to his Rousseau.
The pretty bartender begins talking to another customer, a man wearing a yellow polo shirt.
This man is a total sleazebag, although the husband doesn't know it yet.
I haven't seen you here much, the sleazebag says.
The pretty bartender tells the sleazebag that she has shifted her schedule.
I'm in school now, she says.
Oh yeah?
What are you studying?
Business, she answers, with a minor in communications.
Is your sister out of the hospital? the sleazebag asks.
Yes, she's at home now, the bartender says, and at this point the husband's cell phone buzzes.
His wife is back from the party.
Where are you? she asks.
I'm at the bar, the husband says.
He wants his wife to come to the bar, so the pretty bartender will see that he has a wife who isn't bad-looking, even if she is a lot older than the bartender.
The husband frowns at his book until his wife arrives, still wearing the low-cut black dress she had on at the party.
The husband doesn't understand why she would wear a dress like that to her father's sixtieth birthday, but she does look good in it.
She sits down between her husband and the sleazebag.
The wife notices the empty snifter in front of her husband and asks, How are you feeling?
Better, the husband says, although actually he looks kind of gray and worn.
Everyone was worried about you, the wife says.
My father gave me the name of a cardiologist at Brigham and Women's. He wants you to make an appointment.
It's not my heart, just a cold, the husband says, annoyed.
He has a heart problem to which his wife's family is always overreacting.
And we don't even live here, the husband grumbles.
Why would I make an appointment with a doctor in Boston?
It's not that far, the wife says.
We could stay with my parents.
But why? the husband says.
Why do we have to keep coming here?
At this point, the young and shapely bartender reappears.
It's last call, she says, leaning toward the husband.
Can I get you anything?
The husband says, Yes, I'll take another.
Coming up! the bartender says.
The wife looks ready to scold the husband, but instead she turns to watch the basketball game on the big TV mounted above the bar.
There's a short silence, then the sleazebag asks, Do you like basketball?, and the wife, turning to face him, says, Yes, I do.
Where are you from? the sleazebag asks.
New York, the wife says.
So, the sleazebag says, the Knicks?
No, the Celtics.
My family is from Boston, the wife says.
The sleazebag is obsessed with the Celtics, and he begins to talk about them enthusiastically.
The husband is, in a funny way, impressed.
The sleazebag says one thing after another about the Celtics without ever falling down the kind of conversational hole the husband fell down with Emily Dickinson.
Like a windup toy, the sleazebag keeps going and going.
And the wife goes along with him.
She tells the sleazebag about her father, who freezes mouse heads in a laboratory at M.I.T.
I've heard of him! the sleazebag says, but it's clear that he's thinking of someone else, or just lying.
It doesn't matter.
As their conversation continues, the wife seems more and more impressed by the sleazebag.
He owns a company that sells health insurance to small businesses.
He has joint custody of two beautiful daughters.
In short, despite being a total scumbag, a real bottom-feeder, the sleazebag knows how to present himself as a decent guy who would not dream of leaving his father-in-law's sixtieth-birthday party early, and if the sleazebag did leave the party early because he wasn't feeling well the wife would not find him at the hotel bar.
He'd be in bed, or, more likely, in the hospital.
The sleazebag inches toward the wife and says something in a low voice.
The wife laughs.
I should interrupt, the husband thinks, but he doesn't know what to say, and also he's now had one and a half hot toddies, plus a glass of wine at the party, plus the extra-strength cold medicine he took earlier. The husband feels woozy.
He keeps his unhappy silence, hoping that his wife will turn away from the sleazebag and talk to him, but what actually happens is that the sleazebag gets up from his stool and says, Well, it's been good meeting you.
The sleazebag shakes the wife's hand, and it looks as if her hand kind of lingers in his.
Then the sleazebag leaves.
The wife stands up.
I left my shawl at the party, she says.
I'm going to run back and get it.
Will you be all right?
Sure, the husband says.
The wife hurries out of the bar.
The husband can't believe it- was she even wearing a shawl?
The bartender, too, looks surprised that the wife has gone running after the total sleazebag.
But what if this was how things worked with the husband and wife?
What if they had an arrangement that they could sleep with whomever they wanted?
What if they were brave, free people whose love for each other could not be damaged by a random hotel hookup?
God, what if?
The husband looks around.
The slender and well-proportioned young bartender with naturally crinkly black hair is standing right there.
All at once, as if by magic, the husband remembers the first lines of a poem by Emily Dickinson.
"My life it stood, a loaded gun, in corners, till a day, the owner passed, identified, and carried me away." The bartender's eyes light up.
Very good, she says, even though the husband has misquoted.
The actual line is: My life had stood.
So tell me, the husband says, what happened to your sister?
The bartender says that her sister was in a car accident.
Her spine was broken, and she has been in a body cast for months.
She, the pretty bartender, spends half her time at her sister's apartment, taking care of her sister's toddler and also cooking for her sister and cleaning, which her sister, obviously, can't do.
The husband is moved by this story.
Sister, work, school, and still she finds time to read Dickinson!
He tells the bartender how impressive he thinks she is.
I can barely hold down a job, he says, and as for writing, forget it.
Oh, you're a writer? the bartender asks.
It's not worth talking about, the husband says, but he wants to talk about it, so he does.
He tells the bartender that he writes short stories about the confusion of life and the unknowability of the heart.
Like Chekhov, the pretty bartender says.
We read a story by him in our fiction class.
Yes, the husband says, kind of like that, but I prefer Nabokov, with his unreliable narrators.
The pretty bartender has not read Nabokov.
It doesn't matter, the husband says.