The Third Wish
Once there was a man who was driving in his car at dusk on a spring evening through part of the forestofSavernake.
His name was Mr. Peters.
The primroses were just beginning but the trees were still bare, and it was cold; the birds had stopped singing an hour ago.
As Mr. Peters entered a straight, empty stretch of road he seemed to hear a faint crying, and a struggling and thrashing, as if somebody was in trouble far away in the trees.
He left his car and climbed the mossy bank beside the road.
Beyond the bank was an open slope of beech trees leading down to thorn bushes through which he saw the gleam of water.
He stood a moment waiting to try and discover where the noise was coming from, and presently heard a rustling and some strange cries in a voice which was almost human--and yet there was something too hoarse about it at one time and too clear and sweet at another.
Mr. Peters ran down the hill and as he neared the bushes he saw something white among them which was trying to extricate itself; coming closer he found that it was a swan that had become entangled in the thorns growing on the bank of the canal.
The bird struggled all the more frantically as he approached, looking at him with hate in its yellow eyes, and when he took hold of it to free it, hissed at him, pecked him, and thrashed dangerously with its wings which were powerful enough to break his arm.
Nevertheless he managed to release it from the thorns, and carrying it tightly with one arm, holding the snaky head well away with the other hand (for he did not wish his eyes pecked out), he took it to the verge of the canal and dropped it in.
The swan instantly assumed great dignity and sailed out to the middle of the water, where it put itself to rights with much dabbling and preening, smoothing its feathers with little showers of drops.
Mr. Peters waited, to make sure that it was all right and had suffered no damage in its struggles.
Presently the swan, when it was satisfied with its appearance, floated in to the bank once more, and in a moment, instead of the great white bird, there was a little man all in green with a golden crown and long beard, standing by the water.
He had fierce glittering eyes and looked by no means friendly.
"Well, Sir," he said threateningly, "I see you are presumptuous enough to know some of the laws of magic.
You think that because you have rescued--by pure good fortune--the King of theForestfrom a difficulty, you should have some fabulous reward."
"I expect three wishes, no more and no less," answered Mr. Peters, looking at him steadily and with composure.
"Three wishes, he wants, the clever man!
Well, I have yet to hear of the human being who made any good use of his three wishes--they mostly end up worse off than they started.
Take your three wishes then--" he flung three dead leaves in the air "--don't blame me if you spend the last wish in undoing the work of the other two."
Mr. Peters caught the leaves and put two of them carefully in his notecase.
When he looked up the swan was sailing about in the middle of the water again, flicking the drops angrily down its long neck.
Mr. Peters stood for some minutes reflecting on how he should use his reward.
He knew very well that the gift of three magic wishes was one which brought trouble more often than not, and he had no intention of being like the forester who first wished by mistake for a sausage, and then in a rage wished it on the end of his wife's nose, and then had to use his last wish in getting it off again.
Mr. Peters had most of the things which he wanted and was very content with his life.
The only thing that troubled him was that he was a little lonely, and had no companion for his old age.
He decided to use his first wish and to keep the other two in case of an emergency.
Taking a thorn he pricked his tongue with it, to remind himself not to utter rash wishes aloud.
Then holding the third leaf and gazing round him at the dusky undergrowth, the primroses, great beeches and the blue-green water of the canal, he said:
"I wish I had a wife as beautiful as the forest."
A tremendous quacking and splashing broke out on the surface of the water.
He thought that it was the swan laughing at him.
Taking no notice he made his way through the darkening woods to his car, wrapped himself up in the rug and went to sleep.
When he awoke it was morning and the birds were beginning to call.
Coming along the track towards him was the most beautiful creature he had ever seen, with eyes as blue-green as the canal, hair as dusky as the bushes, and skin as white as the feathers of swans.
"Are you the wife that I wished for?" asked Mr. Peters.
"Yes I am," she replied. "My name is Leita."
She stepped into the car beside him and they drove off to the church on the outskirts of the forest, where they were married.
Then he took her to his house in a remote and lovely valley and showed her all his treasures--the bees in their white hives, theJerseycows, the hyacinths, the silver candlesticks, the blue cups and the lustre bowl for putting primroses in.
She admired everything, but what pleased her most was the river which ran by the foot of his garden.
"Do swans come up here?" she asked.
"Yes, I have often seen swans there on the river," he told her, and she smiled.
Leita made him a good wife.
She was gentle and friendly, busied herself about the house and garden, polished the bowls, milked the cows and mended his socks.
But as time went by Mr. Peters began to feel that she was not happy.
She seemed restless, wandered much in the garden, and sometimes when he came back from the fields he would find the house empty and she would only return after half an hour or so with no explanation of where she had been.
On these occasions she was always especially tender and would put out his slippers to warm and cook his favourite dish--Welsh rarebit with wild strawberries--for supper.
One evening he was returning home along the river path when he saw Leita in front of him, down by the water.
A swan had sailed up to the verge and she had her arms round its neck and the swan's head rested against her cheek.
She was weeping, and as he came nearer he saw that tears were rolling, too, from the swan's eyes.
"Leita, what is it?" he asked, very troubled.
"This is my sister," she answered. "I can't bear being separated from her."
Now he understood that Leita was really a swan from the forest, and this made him very sad because when a human being marries a bird it always leads to sorrow.
"I could use my second wish to give your sister human shape, so that she could be a companion to you," he suggested.
"No, no," she cried, "I couldn't ask that of her."
"Is it so very hard to be a human being?" asked Mr. Peters sadly.
"Very, very hard," she answered.
"Don't you love me at all, Leita?"
"Yes, I do, I do love you," she said, and there were tears in her eyes again. "But I miss the old life in the forest, the cool grass and the mist rising off the river at sunrise and the feel of the water sliding over my feathers as my sister and I drifted along the stream."
"Then shall I use my second wish to turn you back into a swan again?" he asked, and his tongue pricked to remind him of the old King's words, and his heart swelled with grief inside him.
"Who would darn your socks and cook your meals and see to the hens?"
"I'd do it myself as I did before I married you," he said, trying to sound cheerful.
She shook her head. "No, I could not be as unkind to you as that.
I am partly a swan, but I am also partly a human being now.
I will stay with you."
Poor Mr. Peters was very distressed on his wife's account and did his best to make her life happier, taking her for drives in the car, finding beautiful music for her to listen to on the radio, buying clothes for her and even suggesting a trip round the world.
But she said no to that; she would prefer to stay in their own house near the river.
He noticed that she spent more and more time baking wonderful cakes--jam puffs, petits fours, eclairs and meringues.
One day he saw her take a basketful down to the river and he guessed that she was giving them to her sister.
He built a seat for her by the river, and the two sisters spent hours together there, communicating in some wordless manner.
For a time he thought that all would be well, but then he saw how thin and pale she was growing.
One night when he had been late doing the accounts he came up to bed and found her weeping in her sleep and calling:
"Rhea!
Rhea!
I can't understand what you say!
Oh, wait for me, take me with you!"
Then he knew that it was hopeless and she would never be happy as a human.
He stooped down and kissed her goodbye, then took another leaf from his notecase, blew it out of the window, and used up his second wish.
Next moment instead of Leita there was a sleeping swan lying across the bed with its head under its wing.
He carried it out of the house and down to the brink of the river, and then he said "Leita! Leita!" to waken her, and gently put her into the water.
She gazed round her in astonishment for a moment, and then came up to him and rested her head lightly against his hand; next instant she was flying away over the trees towards the heart of the forest.
He heard a harsh laugh behind him, and turning round saw the old King looking at him with a malicious expression.
"Well, my friend!
You don't seem to have managed so wonderfully with your first two wishes, do you?
What will you do with the last?
Turn yourself into a swan?
Or turn Leita back into a girl?"
"I shall do neither," said Mr. Peters calmly. "Human beings and swans are better in their own shapes."
But for all that he looked sadly over towards the forest where Leita had flown, and walked slowly back to his empty house.
Next day he saw two swans swimming at the bottom of the garden, and one of them wore the gold chain he had given Leita after their marriage; she came up and rubbed her head against his hand.
Mr. Peters and his two swans came to be well known in that part of the country; people used to say that he talked to the swans and they understood him as well as his neighbours.
Many people were a little frightened of him.
There was a story that once when thieves tried to break into his house they were set upon by two huge white birds which carried them off bodily and dropped them in the river.
As Mr. Peters grew old everyone wondered at his contentment.
Even when he was bent with rheumatism he would not think of moving to a drier spot, but went slowly about his work, milking the cows and collecting the honey and eggs, with the two swans always somewhere close at hand.