Ashes
I'm at work on Saturday when I get the call.
Carina, from the front counter, pages me over the intercom and when I finally get to the phone it's my older brother, Jano, telling me I might want to sit down because he has upsetting news.
"Tell me," I say.
"Do you have a chair?"
"Just tell me."
What I have is a hollow feeling in my stomach the size of a coconut.
"Mama's gone," he says.
"What?"
My heart seizes.
"Se?ora L車pez found her today."
"Found her?
Where was Papi?"
"Are you sitting down?" he asks again.
"Stop asking me that.
Why can't you just answer my questions?"
"It's a little bit complicated, O.K.?"
"How?"
But he won't answer that, either.
He just suggests we meet when I get off work because we have a lot of things to take care of.
I'm not supposed to use the phone during work hours, but I call Armando as soon as I hang up.
I hold the plastic beige contraption trembling next to my ear as I talk.
He tells me I should take off early, that my boss will understand because this is an extenuating circumstance.
Armando's never had to work anywhere like this, though, and he doesn't get the idea that I'm just a body doing a job, not somebody doing it.
Still, I tell him I'll try.
He leaves me with "We can go out for dinner if you want. You don't have to cook."
I end up staying at Casa de la Carne for my whole shift.
Work helps keep my mind off everything.
If I'd left early, I would have been a blubbering thing sitting on the curb in the parking lot- the way I can be only in private, or sometimes, when he's being nice, with Armando. Never in front of my family.
I know they think I'm more heartless than them for that, but I know the truth.
I know my depths.
The story is that she had a heart attack.
She was cooking- like she was always cooking- and she simply fell over on the kitchen floor.
Papi was sitting in a wooden chair at the kitchen table, probably smoking a cigarette while she worked, waiting to be served.
She fell right at his feet.
We think he tried to help her, tried to blow air into her mouth, pumping and puffing.
Jano says Papi picked up the phone but couldn't remember the number for emergency, and, after trying a jumble of numbers over and over again, he just gave up.
"Why didn't he call one of us?" I say when I see Jano after work.
Jano shrugs.
"I don't think he really knew what was happening."
We both know Papi is sick, mentally gone, but we never talk about him in those terms.
We like to pretend he's just old.
When Sra. L車pez got there this morning, she found Papi sitting in the wooden chair with the phone still in his hand, buzzing because it was off the hook.
She saw Mama at his feet.
"The oven was on, too," Jano says.
"There could have been a fire on top of everything else."
He shakes his head.
Sra. L車pez pried the phone from Papi's hands and called Jano.
That was earlier today.
"Papi's going to stay with me now," Jano says.
"I don't think he can be alone."
"He can stay with me," I say.
Jano shakes his head. "Uh-uh."
"Why not?"
"He'll like it at our house better."
"My place is fine."
"What?" Jano asks.
"You have a newfound interest in him?"
"Do you?"
We're at an ice-cream shop near my work.
The cold air has turned Jano's lips slightly purple.
Besides an employee in a pink apron, we're the only people here.
The bright lights bounce off the white counters and smack me in the face.
I'm quiet for a minute. Then I start on a reel of questions. How does he know it was a heart attack?
What are we going to do now?
What's happening to the house?
Is his wife, Zenia, O.K. with Papi being there?
What else did Papi say?
Why did Sra. L車pez call him instead of me?
He answers every one.
He's unusually patient with me.
He's waiting to see if I'll break, I know, if this will be the thing that puts me over the edge, brave-faced little Mireya.
The last time I saw her, my mother was sitting with me on her patio.
She was in the metal rocking chair she'd had since before I was born, olive-green seat cushions and floral ironwork along the arms.
She had her legs stretched out in front of her, knee-high nylons rolled down around her crossed ankles like life preservers, terry house slippers on her feet.
She looked relaxed as she lectured me on her favorite subject- politics.
She was telling me how fortunate it was that she had named me Mireya, because the President of Panama was Mireya Moscoso.
She must have said about ten times, "That could have been you," as if the only prerequisite for becoming the President was having the right name.
She hated that politics held no interest for me.
The one thing my mother liked about Armando was his appetite for the political.
Just for that, of all the people in my family, she was his only fan.
That day, there was an election parade in the neighborhood.
Martin Torrijos was riding all over our section of town, shouting from the windows of his van and waving a Panamanian flag in a bid to become the next President.
It was the reason we were outside on the patio.
My mother was waiting for him.
We'd been talking for almost an hour when his big white van, followed by pickup trucks with speakers on the flatbeds blasting music, rumbled up our street.
My mother stood and smoothed out the front of her robe.
She was old enough that her spine had begun to bow.
Torrijos stopped his van in front of our patio.
He asked my mother how she and her sister, meaning me, were doing.
My mother shouted, "What will you do about the hospitals?"
Torrijos smiled and waved.
"And what about the canal?" she yelled into the sunlight.
Torrijos tossed a T-shirt out the window to her.
"For you!" he shouted.
My mother let it land at her feet.
"Pendejo!" she shouted, and the van continued up the street.
It wasn't everyone who would call a politician an idiot to his face.
I smiled until I thought my cheeks would burst.
I'd always felt there was something special between my mother and me.
Like she was somehow more mine than Jano's.
But maybe all children feel that- a sovereignty of ownership over the parent they love best.
When I get home that night, Armando sprints out to see me.
"Pobrecita," he says. He's making a face like I'm a puppy with a broken leg.
"I have a poem for you."
"Another one?"
"When was the last one?" he asks, leaning over the kitchen table, reaching for a book.
He finds the page he wants and says, "It's by Cesar Vallejo.
He's one of the great writers. He wrote for the people."
I sit down as he reads it to me.
I don't understand poetry the way he does.
Things either sound good to me or they don't. That's it.
The poem he reads tonight is short.
It's about the poet's brother, who died.
My favorite line is "And now a shadow falls on the soul."
I feel the tears burn behind my eyes.
"It's nice," I say when he's done.
Then I quickly scoot my chair back and head for the shower.
Under the spray, the meat juices wash from my fingernails, from my pores.
I tilt my head back and let the water stream down my face until I can't tell anymore where the water ends and my tears begin.
Armando comes in after me.
He knows this is my place to cry.
He peels off his clothes and steps into the stall and tries to hold me.
His dark, moppish hair sticks to the sides of his face.
His skin slips over mine.
He pushes me out of the water and examines my eyes.
"Are the tears gone now?"
I shrug.
"Tell me, Mireya," he pleads.
It's the split second of something in his voice that, despite everything else, makes me love him.
"I think they're just starting," I say.
He bends down and licks one cheek, then the other, gently, with the tip of his tongue.
"I'll get them," he says, and he does.
My father cleaned government buildings at night.
He came home in the early morning hours, high on ammonia and bleach, and made my mother prepare dinner for him in the dark.
When he worked overtime, she cooked dinner as the sun rose.
Many nights, the smell of spicy chicken or ropa vieja woke me and I knew that my father had just arrived.
During the day, he should have been sleeping, but more often he was out in bars or with other women or smoking on our front step, ashes fluttering in the air like confetti.
My mother was never happy with him.
I mean, she must have been at one time, but I'd never witnessed it.
I'd hear her, at night, through the thin walls, sobbing in her room.
She knew about everything my father did- I often heard them arguing about his carryings-on- but, for all her strength, she was never able to stop him and never able to walk away.
There was one time when I thought she came close.
My father had taken a job cleaning houses during the day and at some point he started returning home with hair dryers, mixing bowls, toaster ovens, picture frames.
Of course, we knew where these things were coming from.
No one said anything, though, until a police officer showed up at our house one afternoon asking questions.
It was easy enough to get rid of him- my father offered him a speaker system- but I'd never seen my mother so angry.
For a whole week, she spoke to him only once, when she told him, "You shamed me."
The only time I even saw a moment of affection between them was much later, after Jano had married and I had moved out on my own.
My father had retired, and they were living off his pension and the odd lottery payout.
My mother had asked me to get some melons at the stand near my house and bring them over.
She was very particular about which melons she deemed acceptable.
When I got there, the front door was wide open and inside I saw them, sitting on our old peach-colored couch, my father at one end and my mother stretched out at the other, her feet propped on his lap.
He was tickling the soles of her feet with his fingertips and she was flinching, but laughing.
Then he reached over and cupped her hair behind her ear.
She followed the movement of his hand with her head, like a horse.
That was all. But there was real tenderness in it.
Armando is Argentinean, a different breed.
We met when I was on my way out of work one afternoon, heading for the bus.
He must have been standing there for hours, surveying every so-and-so who walked by.
I'm not beautiful. I know that.
I'm just this girl with my mother's squash-shaped body, and dense black hair and a mole on my right cheek.
But I always thought it meant something that he seized on me.
Came right up to me and said, "You look like you could use a decent meal.