Fischer Vs. Spassky
For a long time after her husband died, Marina used to scream. She'd feel the scream rushing up from her stomach, choking her from the inside, and she'd run out of the room, stumbling over her kids' toys, and hide in the hallway, in the narrow space between the coatrack and the mirror stand, biting down on her right forearm to muffle the sound.
After the scream had passed, and she unclenched her teeth, there would be little circular marks on her arm that looked like irregular postage stamps.
Those scars remained long after Marina had stopped screaming, long after she had ceased grieving for her husband altogether.
Even now, thirty years later, she could feel them tingle at random moments.
She felt it when she heard Bobby Fischer's name on the radio. She was driving down a snowbound Brooklyn street on the way to see a client.
The radio was on low, but she thought she heard the announcer repeating that name.
She turned up the volume and there it was: Bobby Fischer.
Bobby Fischer had died. Bobby Fischer had died in Reykjavik, Iceland.
Marina turned onto a side street and started her crawl up the slippery slope that led to Elijah's house.
His empty driveway was unshovelled, so she had to park on the street between two caked mounds of brown snow.
She knocked on the front door, then opened it without waiting for an answer.
Inside, there was the usual picture: Elijah in his chair, tiny, wrinkled, wearing his cancer hat, while his night health aide, a chubby young woman, dozed in front of the blaring TV.
Marina called the night aide's name to rouse her, and she groaned and opened her eyes.
Her face was creased. Her mouth had traces of dried saliva.
She was embarrassed about being caught sleeping on the job but mostly angry at being woken up.
She took her time gathering her things, zipping up her boots, and heading outside, while Elijah sat, staring at the TV.
"Bobby Fischer died today," Elijah said. "Look." And he pointed toward the TV. There was a closeup of Fischer in 1972.
An enormous, warty face, twitching with anxiety.
"Do you know who he was?"
"Oh, yes," Marina said. "I was following that match in Russia."
She went to wash her hands, and when she came back into the room Elijah was slumped in his chair, his face twisted in pain.
She gave him his pills, then poured herself a cup of coffee, and sat down on the sofa.
On the TV was footage of the 1972 match. Excited crowds in Reykjavik and Moscow. Excited crowds all over the States.
Americans cheering for Fischer. Russians cheering for Spassky.
"See how they're cheering?" Elijah asked. "I bet you were rooting for Spassky!"
His words were becoming slurred.
"As a matter of fact, we supported Fischer," Marina said, but Elijah was already asleep.
His head, too heavy for his withered neck, fell down onto his chest.
In 1972, all Marina's friends had rooted for Fischer.
All the Russian Jews who considered themselves liberal had wanted Fischer to win.
For them, the Soviet Union stood for everything that was vile and deceitful, while the United States held the promise of everything that was good.
And Fischer was the face of that good. The enormous, warty face of democracy.
Marina's husband, Sergey, was an especially passionate supporter of Fischer.
"I can't believe how they're making him look!" he said, slapping a fresh copy of Pravda down on the rickety kitchen table, making five-year-old Sasha jump.
"Like a fucking idiot! The man is a genius!"
"Sh-h-h!"
Marina said, as she always did when Sergey expressed his indignation in front of Sasha, even though she agreed with him a hundred per cent.
There were so many things about the Soviet Union that gnawed at them. So many lies, so many humiliations, big and small.
The fact that Marina hadn't been accepted into graduate school because another Jew had just been given a spot.
The fact that Sergey hadn't been allowed to attend a scientific conference abroad because he wasn't a member of the Party.
The fact that they had to stand in line to buy meat or toilet paper or underpants. Plain white cotton underpants- they weren't even pretty!
Color was what impressed Marina the most in the glimpses of foreign life that she saw in movies and magazines. Cars painted yellow and blue and green. Pink houses. Azure swimming pools. Red bras. Crimson lipstick.
Straightforward envy over everyday objects grew into a kind of existential restlessness. She felt as if she were boxed up in some bleak, inferior world, while other people were outside enjoying bright and wonderful lives.
Sergey took it especially hard. Ever since he was a child he'd experienced the lack of freedom as a physical thing.
He liked to keep the frames of his glasses a little loose, to avoid even the slightest pressure on his temples.
He never wore gloves, not even in the dead of winter, because they stifled his fingers.
Sasha grew up to be just like him. Or even worse. He never wore ties or turtlenecks and always bought shoes a half size too big.
In the fall of 1971, Sergey told her that they needed to think seriously about emigrating.
Some of their friends were in the process of leaving. Some had already left.
They had nothing to lose. Marina's parents were dead. Sergey's parents had two other sons.
Sergey was a talented chemist; he was bound to find a good job in the U.S., where the opportunities were unlimited and success required only talent and determination.
They could get a visa to Israel, he said, make it to Europe, then try to get into the U.S. from there.
It would be difficult, but not impossible.
The hardest part was getting the exit visa from the Soviet Union. Many people were denied.
Their friends Andrey and Nina Botkin had been denied and now lived in a horrible state of limbo, outlaws in the eyes of the Soviet government, both fired from their jobs, Andrey painting cabins at some remote resort, Nina working as a cleaning lady at a school for the deaf, their son, Kolya, expelled from his kindergarten and left in the care of his psychotic grandmother.
Marina was terrified of ending up like that, and she could tell that Sergey was, too.
They spent the entire winter and a good part of the spring discussing whether applying for a visa was worth the risk.
In May, when the match between Spassky and Fischer was first touted in the press as a Cold War standoff, Sergey, excited, said that he was willing to let the match decide their fate.
If Fischer won, they would apply for exit visas. If he lost, they would stay in the Soviet Union.
Marina didn't take this too seriously. She started looking for a dacha for the summer.
She found a tiny house in a village called Oselki, perched on a hill right by the train station.
"We'll be able to see you coming home from the porch," she said to Sergey.
It was an ugly house. All brown, with chipped pink paint on the shutters. Marina found it touching.
Oselki was thirty-three kilometres from Moscow, thirty-three hundred kilometres from Reykjavik, and four hours ahead.
It was Sergey who had calculated the distance and the time difference, so that it would be easier for them to follow the match in real time.
"Seven, it's seven here," he mumbled when he woke up. "It's only 3 A.M. in Reykjavik. Fischer and Spassky must be fast asleep."
Marina groaned and got out of bed. She threw a shawl over her nightgown and ran to the outhouse.
A warm morning mist rose up off the flowers and the blades of grass, making her feel mildly elated.
They had breakfast on the porch. Sergey was content to eat a little bread and cheese, and then run to the station, but Sasha always asked for farina.
Marina cooked it in an old dented pot, then poured it into shallow bowls, and put a lump of yellow butter and some apple jelly at the center of each.
They ate their porridge in slow spirals, saving the treat for last.
After breakfast, Marina took Sasha to the woods to pick berries- strawberries in July, blueberries in August.
He had a small plastic pail, and Marina carried a large aluminum jug; she loved how the blueberries rapped against the bottom.
When they came home, Sasha played with his modelling clay, and Marina tended to the berries.
They were small and wet. Some of them were rotten already; others were unripe.
It took a long time to clean them, but Marina didn't mind.
After lunch, she undressed Sasha for his nap, removing his clothing in layers: his pants smelled like garden soil, his sweater like modelling clay, and his shirt like apple jelly and Sasha- that distinct Sasha smell that Marina couldn't describe but loved so much.
She used Sasha's nap time to work on her dissertation.
The summer of 1972 was exceptionally hot, and his nap fell at the hottest time of the day, but it wasn't too bad in the garden.
Marina would spread a blanket under a tree and lie down with a book.
She had brought to the dacha a typewriter and five crates of books on behavioral psychology. So far the typewriter had sat unused.
Sergey scolded Marina for not working. "I'm doing my research," she'd say.
But more often than not she'd drop the book on the blanket, and lie down on her side, staring at the dark, crumbly soil so close to her face.
When she was pregnant with Sasha, she'd had a weird craving to eat soil.
What she craved now was for Sergey to appear in the garden and fuck her right there, pressing her naked body into the soil.
She imagined that it would feel warm at first, but then as she sank deeper it would become colder and colder and smell stronger and stronger until she disappeared into the earth.
Marina never shared these fantasies with Sergey. They never really talked about sex. There was no point in talking.
Every night, Marina would wait for Sergey on the porch.
His train arrived at six-fifteen. It was only two-fifteen in Reykjavik, not that she really cared what time it was in Reykjavik.
Sergey carried bags (bread and butter, chicken and fruit- the country store had little to offer), but he always kept his back very straight, as if he wanted to pretend that the bags weighed nothing at all.
He wore a long bushy beard that summer, which looked ridiculous on his young face.
His white shirt was soaked with sweat, stains spreading under his arms and over his back, making him appear even thinner than he was.
Marina always marvelled at how brittle he seemed, when she slid into his arms and clasped her hands around his back. She could have counted his vertebrae.
Sasha would jump out from behind a bush and shoot at Sergey with his toy gun, or wave a caterpillar under his nose, or just clutch onto his leg, screaming, "Papa! Papa! Papa!"
Then he'd run off to play again, while Marina stayed, as if frozen, in her husband's arms.
"Masha. Mashen'ka," he'd say and bend to kiss her neck, while she pressed herself to him tighter and tighter.
Sometimes he called her "my buttermilk cow." She didn't know why.
"Mom, that's horrible," Marina's daughter said, when Marina told her this years later. "He meant you were fat!"
No, he meant that he loved her. But Marina didn't know how to explain that to her daughter.
He called Sasha a "maestro of farts" and a "hidalgo of snot," and loved him more than anything.