Extreme Solitude
It was debatable whether or not Madeleine had fallen in love with Leonard the first moment she'd seen him.
She hadn't even known him then, and so what she'd felt was only sexual attraction, not love.
Even after they'd gone out for coffee, she couldn't say that what she was feeling was anything more than infatuation.
But ever since the night they went back to Leonard's place after watching "Amarcord" and started fooling around, when Madeleine found that instead of being turned off by physical stuff, as she often was with boys, instead of putting up with that or trying to overlook it, she'd spent the entire night worrying that she was turning Leonard off, worrying that her body wasn't good enough, or that her breath was bad from the Caesar salad she'd unwisely ordered at dinner; worrying, too, about having suggested they order Martinis because of the way Leonard had sarcastically said, "Sure. Martinis.
Let's pretend we're Salinger characters"; after having had, as a consequence of all this anxiety, pretty much no sexual pleasure, despite the perfectly respectable session they'd put together, and after Leonard (like every guy) had immediately fallen asleep, leaving her to lie awake stroking his head and vaguely hoping that she wouldn't get a yeast infection, Madeleine asked herself if the fact that she'd just spent the whole night worrying wasn't, in fact, a surefire sign that she was falling in love.
And certainly after they'd spent the next three days at Leonard's place having sex and eating pizza, after she'd relaxed enough to be able to come once in a while and finally to stop worrying so much about having an orgasm because her hunger for Leonard was in some way satisfied by his satisfaction, after she'd allowed herself to sit naked on his gross couch and to walk to the bathroom knowing that he was staring at her (imperfect) ass, to root for food in his disgusting refrigerator, to read the brilliant half page of philosophy paper sticking up out of his typewriter, and to hear him pee with taurine force into the toilet bowl, certainly, by the end of those three days, Madeleine knew she was in love.
But that didn't mean she had to tell anyone.
Especially Leonard.
Madeleine had met Leonard in an upper-level semiotics seminar taught by a renegade from the English department.
Michael Zipperstein had arrived at Brown thirty-two years earlier filled with zeal for the New Criticism.
He'd inculcated the habits of close reading and biography-free interpretation into three generations of students before taking a Road to Damascus sabbatical, in Paris, in 1975, where he'd met Roland Barthes at a dinner party and been converted, over duck cassoulet, to the new faith.
Now Zipperstein taught two courses in the newly created Program in Semiotic Studies: Introduction to Semiotic Theory, in the fall, and, in the spring, Semiotics 211.
Hygienically bald, with a seaman's mustacheless white beard, Zipperstein favored French fisherman's sweaters and wide-wale corduroys.
He buried people with his reading lists: in addition to all the semiotic big hitters--Derrida, Eco, Barthes--the students in Semiotics 211 had to contend with a magpie nest of reserve reading that included everything from Balzac's "Sarrasine" to issues of Semiotext(e) to xeroxed selections from E. M. Cioran, Robert Walser, Claude Levi-Strauss, Peter Handke, and Carl Van Vechten.
To get into the seminar, you had to submit to a one-on-one interview with Zipperstein during which he asked bland personal questions, such as what your favorite food or dog breed was, and made enigmatic Warholian remarks in response.
This esoteric probing, along with Zipperstein's guru's dome and beard, gave his students a sense that they'd been spiritually vetted and were now??for two hours Wednesday afternoons, at least--part of a campus lit-crit elite.
Almost overnight it became laughable to read writers like Cheever or Updike, who wrote about the suburbia Madeleine and most of her friends had grown up in, in favor of reading the Marquis de Sade, who wrote about anally deflowering virgins in eighteenth-century France.
Madeleine had become an English major for the purest and dullest of reasons: because she loved to read.
The university's "British and American Literature Course Catalogue" was, for Madeleine, what its Bergdorf equivalent was for her roommates.
A course listing like "English 274: Lyly's Euphues" excited Madeleine the way a pair of Fiorucci cowboy boots did Abby. "English 450A: Hawthorne and James" filled Madeleine with an expectation of sinful hours in bed that was not unlike the sensation Olivia got from wearing a Lycra skirt and leather blazer to Danceteria.
Right up through her third year of college, Madeleine had kept wholesomely taking courses like "Victorian Fantasy: From 'Phantastes' to 'The Water-Babies,' " but by senior year she could no longer ignore the contrast between the blinky people in her Beowulf seminar and the hipsters down the hall reading Maurice Blanchot.
Going to college in the moneymaking eighties lacked a certain radicalism.
Semiotics was the first thing that smacked of revolution.
It drew a line; it created an elect; it was sophisticated and Continental; it dealt with provocative subjects, with torture, sadism, hermaphroditism--with sex and power.
Semiotics 211 was limited to ten students.
Of those ten, eight had taken Introduction to Semiotic Theory.
This was visually apparent at the first class meeting.
Lounging around the seminar table, when Madeleine came into the room from the wintry weather outside, were eight people in black T-shirts and ripped black jeans.
A few had razored off the necks or sleeves of their T-shirts.
There was something creepy about one guy's face--it was like a baby's face that had hideously aged--and it took Madeleine a full minute to realize that he'd shaved off his eyebrows.
Everyone in the room was so spectral-looking that Madeleine's natural healthiness seemed suspect, like a vote for Reagan.
She was relieved, therefore, when a big guy in a down jacket and snowmobile boots showed up and took the empty seat next to her. He had a cup of takeout coffee.
Zipperstein asked the students to introduce themselves and explain why they were taking the seminar.
The boy without eyebrows spoke up first.
"Um, let's see.
I'm finding it hard to introduce myself, actually, because the whole idea of social introductions is so encoded.
Like, if I tell you that my name is Thurston and that I grew up in Greenwich, Connecticut, will you know who I am?
O.K.
My name's Thurston and I'm from Greenwich, Connecticut.
I'm taking this course because I read 'Of Grammatology' last summer and it blew my mind."
When it was the turn of the boy next to Madeleine, he said in a quiet voice that he was a double major (biology and philosophy) and had never taken a semiotics course before, that his parents had named him Leonard, that it had always seemed pretty handy to have a name, especially when you were being called to dinner, and that if anyone wanted to call him Leonard he would answer to it.
Leonard didn't make another comment.
During the rest of the class, he leaned back in his chair, stretching out his long legs.
After he finished his coffee, he dug into his right snowmobile boot and, to Madeleine's surprise, pulled out a tin of chewing tobacco.
With two stained fingers, he placed a wad of tobacco in his cheek.
For the next two hours, every minute or so, he spat, discreetly but audibly, into the cup.
It was the last semester of Madeleine's senior year, a time when she was supposed to have some fun, and she wasn't having any.
She'd never thought of herself as hard up.
Since breaking up with her last boyfriend, Barry, a student filmmaker, she'd enjoyed being unattached.
It was a relief not to have to organize your weekend around what your boyfriend wanted to do.
It was great to concentrate fully on academics, to spend time with your female friends, to skip shaving your legs for a week, if you wanted, and just wear pants.
As far as Madeleine was concerned, she didn't want a boyfriend.
But when she found herself wondering what it would be like to kiss a guy who chewed tobacco she began to think she was fooling herself.
Looking back, Madeleine realized that her college love life had fallen short of expectations.
Her freshman roommate, Jennifer Boomgaard, had rushed off to Health Services the first week of school to be fitted for a diaphragm.
Unaccustomed to sharing a room with anybody, much less a stranger, Madeleine felt that Jennifer was a little too quick with her intimacies.
She didn't want to be shown Jennifer's diaphragm, which reminded her of an uncooked ravioli, and she certainly didn't want to feel the spermicidal jelly that Jennifer offered to squirt into her palm.
Madeleine was frankly shocked when Jennifer started going to parties with the diaphragm already in place, when she wore it to the Harvard-Brown game, and when she left it one morning on top of their miniature fridge.
That winter, when the Reverend Desmond Tutu came to campus for an anti-apartheid rally, Madeleine asked Jennifer on their way to see the great cleric, "Did you put your diaphragm in?"
They lived the next four months in a twenty-by-fifteen room without speaking to each other.
Though Madeleine hadn't arrived at college sexually inexperienced, her freshman learning curve resembled a flat line.
Aside from one makeout session with a Uruguayan named Carlos, a sandal-wearing engineering student who in low light looked like Che Guevara, the only other boy she'd fooled around with was a high-school senior visiting campus for Early Action weekend.
She found Tim standing in line at the Ratty, pushing his cafeteria tray along the metal track, and quietly crying.
His blue blazer was too big for him.
He'd spent the entire day wandering around campus with no one speaking to him.
Now he was starving and wasn't sure if he was allowed to eat in the cafeteria or not.
Tim seemed to be the only person at Brown more lost than Madeleine.
She helped him negotiate the Ratty and, afterward, took him on a tour of the university.
Around ten-thirty that night, they ended up back in Madeleine's dorm room.
Tim had the long-lashed eyes and pretty features of an expensive Bavarian doll, a little prince or yodelling shepherd boy.
His blue blazer was on the floor and Madeleine's shirt unbuttoned when Jennifer Boomgaard came through the door.
"Oh," she said, "sorry," and proceeded to stand there, smiling at the floor as if already relishing how this juicy bit of gossip would play along the hall.
When she finally did leave, Madeleine sat up, readjusted her clothes, and Tim picked up his blazer and went back to high school.
Sophomore year hadn't been much better, romance-wise.
And then junior year she'd gone out with Barry.
A sensitive male, Barry took part in Take Back the Night marches, bearing a candle up College Hill with a crowd of women.
On the wall of his bedroom he painted the words "Kill the Father."
Killing the father was what, in Barry's opinion, college was all about.
"Who's your father?" he asked Madeleine.
"Is it Virginia Woolf?
Is it Sontag?"
"In my case," Madeleine said, "my father really is my father."
"Then you have to kill him."
A month or so later, Madeleine got rid of Barry instead.
Each week, Zipperstein assigned one daunting book of literary theory and one literary "text."
The pairings were eccentric, if not downright arbitrary.
Madeleine still wasn't sure to what extent Lyotard's "The Postmodern Condition" had illuminated Pynchon's "The Crying of Lot 49."
In Week Four, they started on Derrida.
As the class beat its way into the thickets of deconstruction, however, Madeleine's attention often wandered to Leonard.