Experience
When my marriage fell apart one summer, I had to get out of the little flat in Kentish Town, where I had been first happy and then sad.
I arranged to live for a few months in another woman's house; she agreed to let me stay there rent-free, because she was going to America and wanted someone to keep an eye on things.
I didn't know Hana very well; she was a friend of a friend.
I found her intimidating- she was tall and big-boned and gushing, with a high forehead and a curvaceous strong jaw, a mass of chestnut-colored curls.
But I liked the idea of having her three-story red brick London town house all to myself.
She was generous when we met to sort out arrangements, telling me to make myself at home, entertain my friends, use her iMac and her Wi-Fi, help myself to anything I needed in the kitchen, and sleep in her bed. ("The bed's wonderfully comfortable," she said.)
A woman would come in twice a week to clean, and I didn't have to pay for that, either.
We sat at the counter in Hana's kitchen, drinking coffee and eating baklava from a cardboard box- left over from a dinner party the night before, along with the remains of a salad, wilting in its dressing, glasses with dregs of red wine by the sink, the taint of cigarette smoke.
Hana had just showered, and her damp hair was twisted in a clip on top of her head; her heated skin gave off the strong smell of her perfume or her shower gel.
A crumb of baklava stuck to her mouth.
I guessed that she was in her early forties: the flesh was puffy under her eyes and at the corners of her lips; she might have had work done on her nose.
I was twenty-eight, and she made me feel inexperienced, although I had been married for six years.
She wore a bright-yellow kimono embroidered with a dragon, and a heavy ivory bangle on her wrist.
"I know," she said guiltily, grimacing and twisting it on her arm when she thought I was staring at it. "I shouldn't wear it; it's a sin. But it's an antique. I tell myself that these elephants would be long dead anyway."
There were no curtains on the windows of that house, not even in the bedrooms.
At first, I found this unbearable.
I undressed for bed in the bathroom; I got into bed in the dark.
But after a while I began to get used to it.
This was how Hana lived her life- flamboyantly on display, careless of who might be watching.
I didn't flatter myself that anyone was watching me.
Or if they were watching, they thought I was something I was not, so it didn't matter.
They thought I was the owner of that house, with its big, bare rooms and wood floors and rugs and few, distinctive items of furniture: a retro armchair in tubular steel and black leather, a long glass-topped dining table, two antique mirrors framed with gilded cupids bearing rose garlands.
I've never had that kind of money, or anything like it.
I think Hana made her money by dealing in art- there were paintings on all the walls- though some of the phone calls that came for her seemed to be related to the film business.
I moved in with the few boxes of things I'd salvaged from my marriage.
What I'd really wanted was to walk out of the flat with nothing, shedding it all behind me as cleanly as a skin.
The little collection of totems that I took with me everywhere- pebbles from a certain beach, a few framed photographs, my dead mother's empty perfume bottle- looked like rubbish when I spread them out in Hana's bedroom, so I hid them away again.
I told myself that this house was a good place for me, temporarily: this nowhere where I was nobody.
When the woman came in to clean, I went out and walked around on Primrose Hill or went to a museum, if it was raining- it rained a lot that summer.
My husband had given me some money in exchange for my share of the things we'd bought together (fridge, television, sofa, bed), and I was trying to make it last as long as possible.
Hana had told me to help myself to what was in the freezer, so I ate through the odds and ends of food she had in there, including things I'd never tasted before- veal saltimbocca, shrimp in teriyaki sauce, and jerk chicken.
When the money runs out, I thought, I'll start looking for work.
On rainy days, I wandered from room to room in that big house, cocooned by the rushing, persistent sound of the rain sluicing across the slate roof, overflowing in the gutters and downpipes.
At midday, the light outside was blue, and the panes in the tall windows seemed liquefied; I switched on all the lamps.
I made myself coffee and carried it with me to the window, so that the steam from my mug misted the glass; the television flickered and capered, but I couldn't distract myself from the rain's urgency, as if it were something happening.
I had thought that I would forget about Hana once she was out of the house, but, moving around inside the shapes of her life, I found myself more powerfully impressed by her than I had been when she was present.
The wardrobes full of her clothes stood in for her: velvet trousers and brocade jackets, an evening dress of pleated chiffon with a sequinned bodice- everything padded and sculpted, each outfit a performance in itself.
There were attic rooms at the top of the house and one of these was locked.
Hana had emptied out drawers and cupboards to make space for me, so I guessed that she had tidied everything personal away into this room.
I came across the key accidentally, in a kitchen drawer beside some tea towels.
Those attic rooms had the original door fittings and this was a long iron key, like something in a novel or a pantomime.
At the time, I hardly registered seeing it.
Then it began to weigh on my mind, and one afternoon, when I had nothing better to do, I took it upstairs to try it in the lock.
I feel ashamed of this now, needless to say.
I think I felt that because I was nobody my slipping inside Hana's privacy wouldn't count as a real intrusion.
And she'd left the key lying around, hadn't she?
Anyway, I only meant to take a quick look.
The room was heaped surprisingly high with stuff, as if she'd been using it for storage for a long time.
There were the clothes and shoes and bags filled with accessories and old makeup that I'd expected.
There were also paintings- speculations that hadn't paid off, perhaps?- propped, sometimes two or three deep, against the walls, their faces turned away as if in disgrace.
Two new mattresses were still in their polythene.
Art objects- ceramics and ethnic souvenirs and bits of sculpted wood- were muddled on the floor with a food processor and china dinner plates, a steam cleaner, and a broken chandelier with tangled crystals.
Suitcases were piled on top of hi-fi speakers and an old computer; a black wetsuit was flung dramatically in a corner over surfboards and camping gear.
There were boxes filled with DVDs and those big glossy books- biographies and cookbooks- that people give as presents and no one reads.
I stepped inside the room.
The air was thick with the heat that had collected under the roof and loud with the noise of the rain running down the far side of the sloping ceiling.
It was like stepping into a cave.
I felt as if I'd found my way into the inner workings of the house, or of Hana.
Boxes and plastic bags were crammed with papers: letters and postcards and notebooks, photographs, nothing in any kind of order- yellowing letters stuffed in with recent bank statements.
I just poked around at first; I wasn't really reading anything.
There were a lot of business papers, anyway, which didn't mean much to me, though the sums of money were startling.
Even without touching the DVDs I could see that they were porn and the kind of hard-core horror films I couldn't watch: she had left the art films and rom-coms downstairs for me.
I picked up a heart-shaped box covered in padded red satin.
Inside, nestled under a wad of black tissue, were scraps of scarlet lace underwear, furry handcuffs, fishnets, and a vibrator, as bald and blatant as a medical appliance: I put the lid back on hastily.
But this stuff was ordinary, wasn't it?
Everybody did it.
What was the matter with me that I didn't take it for granted, that my heart beat stickily, as if the little sex kit had somehow made a fool of me?
Kneeling on the bare boards, I started reading my way through the contents of a plastic bag.
One of the expensive leather-bound notebooks was a kind of diary.
It began and broke off abruptly, without dates.
Hana had become involved with a man named Julian.
She wrote about him in a big, looping hand that filled up two ruled lines at a time, dotting her "i"s with circles, using a lot of asterisks and private code words and exclamation marks.
Everything was "amazing" or "terrible."
"I knew this was going to happen," she wrote, "from the first moment he walked into the party that night."
Julian told her that he couldn't get enough of her, that he was desperate for her, that he wanted her all over again as soon as he'd had her.
They were at some dinner where they had to pretend not to know each other, ended up having sex in the bathroom.
A line of dots, and then more exclamation marks.
"He hurts me and frightens me, but it's the best s*x ever."
Along with the sex, there was some lengthy analysis of Julian's personality.
The two of them were very alike, Hana thought.
They "both had this ambition burning them up" and "a lot of imagination"; also they "needed to be free."
But a few pages on she was "starting to see through him"- how moody he was, how he always had to be the center of attention.
"Of course it's terrible about the children," she wrote.
They'd had a blissful weekend away together and swum naked in the sea, f***d in the shower.
"Now he's gone back to S and I feel like shit."
Hana made scenes, crawled to him on her knees, begged him to stay.
"J came round at three in the morning and I let him in, couldn't help myself.
Then X and you know what. Crazy with love all over again.
He makes me so happy."
These were the last words in the notebook.
I've never lived, I thought, as I knelt there, reading with my legs cramped underneath me, aware of the rain as if it were drumming on my skin.
I've never lived: the words ran in my head.
Life was garish and ruthless and exaggerated, and I'd never really had it- I was like one of those child brides in history whose marriage was annulled by the Pope because it wasn't consummated.
Of course, mine had been consummated in the ordinary sense.
But even when my husband told me that he wanted us to separate, even when he told me that he wasn't in love with me anymore, and that he'd better keep the flat because I wouldn't be able to afford the rent by myself, I hadn't ranted or thrown pans at him.