The surrogate
When I was twenty, I fell in love with one of the lecturers at my college.
I know that this is a very ordinary thing to do. And I know now that lecturers, when they notice yet another smitten girl-child traipsing moonily around after them, simply sigh and feel anxious.
They feel anxious and all the other things you would expect, too: flattered and confirmed and a little bit stimulated.
His name was Patrick Hammett, and he taught courses on Shakespeare, seventeenth-century poetry, and critical theory.
I took all his classes; I made him my interpreter of the whole world.
Patrick was tall, with rather bowed shoulders; he was hollowly thin except for a small soft beer belly nestled in the stretched cloth of his T-shirt above his belt.
He wore his thick black hair down to his shoulders, tucked behind his ears.
He used gold-rimmed glasses to read but took them off when he was talking, swung them in his fingers, and sometimes dropped them; without the glasses, his eyes were deep-set and squinted slightly.
In a crowd, in a club, you wouldn't have picked him out as particularly good-looking. But in the lecture room, sitting with us in the democratic circle of chairs that he insisted upon, his looks were a power, a force that I felt physically, like velvet against my skin.
I loved the whitened pressure points that his glasses left on the bridge of his thin crooked nose. I loved the big nervous hands he was always waving in the air, gesturing uncontrollably as he spoke.
Of course I didn't have a chance with him. Who was I?
I wasn't anybody.
I wasn't even one of the cleverest students in his classes.
I wasn't an absolutely average student, either; I was aware that I had a quirky way of seeing things, which sometimes came out as insight and sometimes just left everyone looking blank.
Patrick encouraged me.
Once, he reminded the class of something I'd said. "You remember the point that Carla made in last week's seminar?"
Another time, after I'd made some remark about freedom of choice in "Much Ado About Nothing," he said, "That's very well expressed, Carla.
I couldn't have put that more eloquently myself."
This made me very happy.
But I didn't delude myself.
I wasn't the kind of student who would get a first-class mark.
When I tried to put my thoughts down in writing, the dart of intuition that had been clear and sharp when it flew into my mind got tangled in something muffling and clumsy.
And Patrick's occasional surprise at my penetration didn't mean that he had singled me out.
I didn't really exist for him outside that circle of chairs in the lecture room.
In his seventeenth-century-poetry seminar he read us "The Exequy," by Henry King:
I can't adequately express the effect this poem had on me then.
I don't remember now what season of the year it was, but I do remember that the fluorescent lights in the lecture room were on in the middle of the day because the sky was so dark outside, navy-blue clouds pressing close to the earth like an artificial ceiling.
Little gouts of rain were spitting against the window, and in the gently sloping field outside (the campus was built up around an eighteenth-century house on an estate farmed by the Duchy of Cornwall) the bullocks, instead of lying down as they should have done with rain coming, were jostling uneasily and heaving up against the fence and clambering onto one another's backs.
When I look at the poem now, I see that it is the lament of a much older man for a young wife snatched away by death, and that it depends upon a confidence in the resurrection of the body on Judgment Day.
I don't know anything about those things. But at the time I felt that the words of the poem were so immediate and relevant that they spoke to me not just through my mind but through my body.
I could hear that Drum; its beating came right up out of the floor of the classroom and shook me through the soles of my feet.
I made one of those remarks that didn't come out well, and nobody took much notice of it. "He longs for her and she isn't there," I said.
It sounded too obvious to need stating.
I'd wanted to use the word "sexual" (we were trained to see sexual implications everywhere, and surely in this case I would have been right), but I couldn't bring myself to be the first to say it.
Patrick wanted us to talk about the metaphor of the beloved object as text ("thou art the book, / The library whereon I look"). For me, the text was Patrick.
All the passion, the concentration of the poem I attributed to him. It became my intimation of the pulse of his life, from which I was shut out.
He was only six or seven years older than we were, but his life seemed to be made of different stuff than the lives I was familiar with.
As far as I knew, he wasn't married or living with anyone.
Someone said that he'd once had a relationship with a student, although this was against the rules. That didn't make me any more hopeful.
She had probably been one of the clever ones. She had probably been beautiful.
I didn't think I was.
My looks- I was small and blond with eyes that made the kids at school call me Frogface- were like the quirky things I said in class. Good on a good day.
I dreamed about him all the time.
I don't mean sleeping dreams, although sometimes he was in those as well.
Too many of my waking hours were spent fantasizing scenes in which Patrick and I somehow met outside the classroom and our relationship developed out of distant acquaintance into passionate amour.
I was very exacting as the author and director of these scenes.
Nothing could happen in them that was absurdly improbable or out of character.
Patrick was never allowed, for example, to tell me that he had always loved me, that he had been fascinated by me from the moment I first walked into the lecture room. The scene could begin with no more than his friendly appreciation of an interested student, a teacherly investment in my intellectual development.
He might at most be allowed a little stir of vanity at the depth and earnestness of my response to him.
Still, even given these constraints, the journey from the plausible encounter to the moment when he reached out for me could be travelled in a thousand different ways. (Even in my fantasies I didn't dare reach out for him, in case he turned me down.)
He had to be surprised out of his position of friendly neutrality and into a dawning, uneasy recognition of his growing attraction to me, an attraction that he perhaps couldn't quite rationally account for.
The transformation could be precipitated in various ways; these were the only extravagance I allowed myself. Sometimes we would be accidentally stranded by a breakdown in the middle of nowhere, after he'd innocently offered me a ride home from college. Or we'd be caught by a freak storm when stopping by the cottage of a friend of his to pick up some books. Or he would have to take refuge in my room one night after being beaten up by muggers and left bleeding in the road just as I was on my way home.
I could only really sustain the stories up to this point.
After that, his face came closer, he put his arms around me, there was kissing, there was a pressing together, and the narrative failed- it lost its sequence.
I could- and did- imagine plenty of what happened after, but not in any clear way.
It came in a hallucinated muddle that I would try to disentangle.
I'd return again and again to the gate, the threshold, the movement with which he reached across the distance between us.
I'd start again from there.
But it was never any good.
The dream beyond that point was a loop of film repeating itself.
Exhausting, after a while. Dispiriting.
Because in truth it was nothing at all.
In my second year I was so short of money that I got a job working three evenings a week at a pub in town.
It must have been an old pub once, with lots of twisty little rooms winding around the different levels, but the walls had been knocked down and it was now one huge, cavernous space, low-ceilinged and gloomy.
There were still confusing steps up and down in places, and the floor changed from flagstone to wood to carpet; drunks and women in heels sometimes tripped and spilled their beer.
Video games flashing ruby- and emerald-colored lights stood against the walls. The place didn't have much atmosphere.
It was more fashionable to go to one of the new bars with long pine tables and stainless-steel counters, where food was served; or to one of the quaint old pubs that had kept their little rooms and served real ale.
Big parties came to my pub because there was usually room to seat them.
And men came in, to watch football on the TV screens, the kind of men who didn't want roasted vegetables in pitas or real ale.
I'd worked in nicer pubs.
When I lived at home I'd worked in our local, where the old-timers expected you to start pulling their pints the moment they pushed open the door.
I didn't mind the anonymity of this place. I was often on with temporary staff I didn't know, and that meant I didn't have to talk too much.
If we weren't busy, I just kept order behind the bar. I made sure that the glasses were clean, the lemons sliced, the drip trays emptied, the bottles in the optics replaced as soon as they ran out, the ice bucket filled.
While I was taking care of all this I forgot that I was a student.
I rarely saw anyone from the college in there, students or staff.
But one night, when I came back from asking the landlord to change a barrel, I thought for a moment that I saw Patrick.
A man with the same long narrow build and thick shoulder-length hair was standing with his back to the bar, a pint of lager in one hand, looking up at the TV screen.
Although this was exactly the sort of plausible scenario I was always dreaming up to bring us together, in reality I didn't want it to be him.
I panicked.
I didn't think I could cope with my two roles at once- competent barmaid and besotted student- and I had no idea how to respond when he turned around and recognized me.
But the bloke, when he turned around, wasn't Patrick, though he did look rather like him.
Rather like him but quite different.
He had the same crooked nose- more exaggerated, even- and the same close-set eyes that were revealed when Patrick took his glasses off.
But he didn't wear glasses.
He didn't have any of Patrick's concentrated excitement.
When he asked for a pint of Stella, his accent was ordinary, not like Patrick's educated one.
When I smiled at him and made some comment about the football match, he blushed, and I guessed that he was shy, and maybe not very clever.
He probably would have liked to keep the conversation going, but he couldn't think of what to say to me.
And I got a certain pleasure out of the situation.
I could play at talking to Patrick, without its really mattering.