First husband
Lovey," her husband said gently, which was his way. "It's for you."
The velvet blackness of 2 A.M., of nearly death-deep sleep: the ringing telephone had been a fire alarm in her dream; reluctantly, she'd exited an unfamiliar building but not awakened, hovering in some liminal space.
The building was filled with naked bodies, and she wished to return to them and their naughty party.
"Lovey," her husband said again, and she was livid with him, with his dull insistence, forcing her to attend to him when what she wanted to do was run back inside the burning building.
"Lovey," he said a third time, and then the light snapped on.
On the phone was Bernadette, her former stepdaughter.
Her ex-husband's youngest and most difficult girl, who was busy apologizing, as usual.
"I'm so sorry, but he's been drinking," Bernadette was saying of her delinquent husband. "I need to find him before something happens.
I mean, he can't afford to get arrested again."
"I can be there in twenty minutes."
"Actually?
I'm sorry, but could I bring the kids to you?
If he comes home, I don't want them to see him.
You know, it's just so hard to have a conversation with kids around.
Or a fight, for that matter, which is probably what's going to happen.
God, I'm really so fucking sorry, Lovey. . . ."
"Bring them, please, it's fine- you should never worry about that."
Sleep and dreams had fallen away, along with, she suddenly realized, her first husband, whose hand she'd been holding in the burning building.
Had he been nude, too?
That wouldn't have been like him, naked in public.
"I'm already in the car with them," Bernadette said. "I was thinking I could start on Central and just see if he's parked on some barstool or other.
Please don't tell Dad, O.K.?
I mean, he already thinks I'm a total fuckup and he hates Aaron enough.
Plus, he'll tell my sisters."
And then she was crying.
Poor Bernadette.
Had the girl ever not been miserable?
Even as a child, she had cultivated hurtful friendships, had forever been suffering slights or neglect or flat-out cruelty, this girl like a loyal beaten dog.
"Honey, I would never tell your dad.
We're not exactly on speaking terms.
Bring the kids.
I'm up.
Don't worry."
"Actually?" Bernadette said. "I'm in your driveway.
God, Lovey, I'm really, really sorry!"
The seven-year-old carried the diaper bag and a backpack, tilted sideways under the load, while his mother brought in the two car seats holding his sleeping sisters.
"God, it smells like snow out there!
How often does that happen at this time of year?
I pumped," Bernadette explained in a whisper.
"Give Lovey the breast milk," she told Caleb.
The boy produced a pair of tepid yellowish Baggies.
There was always something a little unsavory about dealing with breast milk.
Maybe if Lovey had had her own babies she wouldn't have felt this way.
The girls were left in their car seats on the living-room rug, which seemed wrong, somehow, people lashed into chairs, especially the three-year-old, whose big head looked unnaturally perpendicular in a way that would lead to a terrible neck ache. On the other hand, the girls were sure to scream if wakened.
Bernadette was squinting at her cell phone, lips moving as she read something there.
"Shit, he's with Lance- that can't end well.
So I think she'll be good till maybe, like, four?"
She pressed her hand into each breast, checking. "You could just nuke a bottle for her then.
And Caleb- I don't think he'll sleep, but he could watch Looney Tunes, maybe?
With no sound?
Will you watch Looney Tunes on mute so Lovey can go back to bed, honey?"
"Don't worry about us," Lovey said. "We'll play Monotony."
Lovey was the only person who would indulge Caleb's fondness for Monopoly.
The boy had been her first grandchild, born the year she divorced his grandfather, when she was a mere thirty-seven- far too young to be called Grandma!
In public she was often mistaken for his mother, and it was for Caleb that she'd come up with an acceptable nickname, Lovey, to take the place of Evelyn.
He was a serious boy, a boy who hadn't spoken until he could do so in complete sentences, who'd said, quite frankly, after the birth of each of his sisters, that he did not like them.
"How's your new sister?" somebody would ask.
"Terrible," he'd reply.
His feelings were so readily hurt. He was like his mother that way, a child too tender, who bruised.
Nor did he laugh easily.
"Please don't think I'm a fuckup," Bernadette pleaded as she whirled her way toward the door. "And tell William I'm sorry I woke him.
Be good, Caleb.
I love you."
Caleb was already laying out the game board, counting money, and stacking up the Chance cards.
He looked like his grandfather, Lovey's first husband- the same thick copper-colored hair, the large brown eyes and plush lips.
Her first husband had been forty-five, at the tail end of his fruitful handsomeness, when she married him but still moving through the world with the confidence of a man who'd bedded a lot of women, all but the first few- when he was a beginner, on the receiving end of a romantic education- younger than him; he was a serial seducer.
Lovey had been his third wife; perhaps she could have predicted that she would not succeed where two others had failed, but that was the nature of love, and of youth, and the combination, youthful love- they made you arrogant, or stubborn, impervious to the lessons of others.
If you paid attention to all the lessons of others, you might never do anything.
Caleb handed Lovey the dog.
He was always the hat.
"I want to be the banker," he said.
"Fine," she said, though this would make it more difficult for her to guarantee that he won. But that was the challenge in raising children, wasn't it?
Insuring that your ability to deceive kept pace with their ability to see through you.
At what point were you able to come completely clean?
Could you ever, for example, reveal to children that parents did not, actually, love their offspring equally?
Her ex-husband had preferred his eldest, the prettiest, the strongest.
And Lovey?
She'd always been partial to needy Bernadette.
Bernadette's sisters had found their stepmother lacking. She was so young.
For a while, it had been fun to play the hip young mother, the one who shared clothing with them, who liked their music, the four of them ganging up on her husband, their father, who was old, so old!
So old-fashioned!
So out of date!
So shockable!
But he wasn't, not really, and at some point his indulgence began to falter, his paternal tolerance turned tense, at least as it regarded Lovey, because eventually she was no longer his pretty young wife; she was, instead, too familiar, too known and knowing, too something he could not even put his finger on, but he no longer wished to have sex with her, no longer found her desirable enough to be able to have sex with her.
This wasn't willed, he assured her; it wasn't his fault.
If she insisted, he could medicate himself into readiness, but did she really want that?
Did she, he asked earnestly, want him to fake what he could not naturally feel?
Was that the kind of love she wanted?
Yes, she confessed, though only to herself.
Yes, that was what she would take, if it was all he could offer.
"You told me to be honest," he said. "This is me being honest."
The first stage of the game was always the best- all that acquisition and possibility, the tidy array of money, the fairness.
Caleb knelt in his chair, poised over the colorful board like a gargoyle, rolling for Lovey when she went to check on his sisters, moving her Scottie dog forward, providing her with two hundred dollars whenever Go came around.
In order not to land on Boardwalk first, Lovey allowed one of the dice to fall to the floor, claiming a number that put her on Luxury Tax, whatever that was, instead.
At last, Caleb acquired his beloved cobalt-blue plot.
Later, once it was expensively developed, Lovey would land there an inordinate number of times so that he could fleece her.
Why was it so satisfying to see him win?
It was nice, this strange intimacy in the kitchen at three in the morning, no other light in the house.
They were outside of time, Lovey thought, waiting for the rules to kick in again.
If it did snow, school might be closed.
Albuquerque was not accustomed to weather; Lovey had grown up in the Midwest, where snow days required an actual blizzard, instead of mere flurries or patches of ice.
Her first husband had brought her to the desert; she could thank him, she supposed, for that gift.
When they parted, he hadn't wanted much of what they'd collected together, in their twelve years.
Was that generosity?
Guilt?
Or simple indifference?
Caleb heard the baby first, his head tipped toward the living room as his hand halted above the board in mid-count.
"Forty-five seconds," he told Lovey, meaning the breast milk and the microwave. "I can do it."
Lovey took the opportunity while the boy was at the refrigerator to slip a five-hundred-dollar bill from her stack of cash back into the bank.
She could not figure out the car seat's elaborate buckle, so the child's crying became hysterical.
Caleb silently undid the clasp, then found the three-year-old's pacifier and stoppered her with it before she fully woke as well.
"You're a good boy," Lovey told him repeatedly.
In the kitchen, the warm bottle waited.
Lovey had only to sit down and assume the position, the girl's face beside her own breast.
While she fed the baby, Caleb played both sides of the game, counting aloud, asking if Lovey wanted to buy the electric company or not.
"Not," she said.
Her pickiness about property he never questioned.
He seemed to accept the idea that he alone knew that buying everything was the secret to success.
Caleb's sisters were utterly unlike their brother.
They demanded what they wanted. They entered a room and immediately began competing to be its center of attention, the baby now knocking her head into Lovey's sternum, making fists with her hands and banging at her bottle; if her nails weren't clipped, she'd rake her own face until it bled.
They required a lot of attention.
They made a great deal of noise.
The three-year-old could not be reasoned with; it was useless to try.
She did not understand taking turns or sharing, and resorted to crude short-cutting substitutions like grabbing and screaming.
"If they were dogs," Caleb had told Lovey of his sisters, "you could put them in a cage."
"If they were dogs," Lovey said, "you could take them to the pound."
When the baby began gagging, Caleb informed Lovey that the bottle was to blame, that the milk came out faster than it did from his mother's breast, that the baby was used to sucking harder, so she choked herself.
"Greedy girl," Lovey murmured. "I wonder where your daddy is."
"I don't know," Caleb said. "But he rode his bike and he forgot his helmet."
"Dangerous."
Although safer, by far, than driving.
Aaron's sobriety was tenuous, court-ordered, the elephant in the room at any family get-together.
He would sit meekly at the table studying his sparkling water while others pretended not to be aware of his every sip.