Whenever I want to be with my fifth wife, I find her in the company of a young man.
He's handsome in a boyish, somewhat delicate but by no means unmanly way, slender but well muscled, dressed always in a dark sports jacket, a light-blue shirt open at the neck, and jeans.
He is polite, self-effacing, and silent.
When my fifth wife and I have lunch together in a downtown restaurant, facing each other across a small table, he sits to her left or right; when we talk at night by the fireplace, he sits on the rug with his head leaning against her leg; when I take off her clothes, she hands them to him; when we slip into bed, he's there beside us, lying on his back with his hands clasped behind his neck.
At first his presence disturbed me, and filled me with bitterness, but in time I've grown used to him.
Once, waking in the night beside her, I saw over her shoulder that he wasn't there; I felt anxious and shook her awake; and only when, smiling faintly, she lifted the covers to display him lying between us in his dark sports jacket, light-blue shirt, and jeans, sleeping soundly with his head between her breasts, did my anxiety subside enough to permit me to fall back to sleep.
Always, when I'm with my sixth wife, a moment comes when she rises slowly toward the ceiling, where she remains hovering above me.
"Dear," I plead, falling on my knees, "won't you come down from there?
I'm worried you'll hurt yourself.
And besides, what have I done?
I didn't disturb you as you sat at the kitchen table with your sketchbook and your stick of charcoal and drew seventeen versions of a fruit knife lying beside a green pear and a white coffee cup.
I didn't clear my throat loudly or walk up and down humming to myself as you leaned back on the couch with your legs tucked under you and twisted a piece of hair slowly around your finger while reading 'Anna Karenina' for the eighth time.
I didn't step up behind you and kiss you with a wet smack on the back of your neck while you sat fiercely erect at the piano practicing over and over the first movement of Mozart's Piano Sonata in A Minor, Kochel 310.
And if I've allowed my eyes to stray for a moment to your glittering knees beneath your dark wool skirt, it was only in order to rest from the judgment of your intelligent, severe eyes."
"Idiot!" she replies. "Do you really think I can hear you from up here?"
And with that she begins to fly back and forth across the ceiling, laughing her tense, seductive laugh, brushing my hair with the tip of her foot.
Whatever I like to do, my seventh wife likes to do.
When I mow the lawn on a warm Saturday afternoon, admiring the straight strips of fresh-cut grass as bursts of sweet-smelling blades fall at my cuffs, she walks alongside me, clasping the left half of the black rubber grip on the red lawnmower handle.
When I read a mystery novel set in a country house in Surrey in the summer of 1935, she reads a second copy of the same book, glancing at me over the top of the pages and stopping when I stop.
On poker night she's the only woman among us; I watch her narrow her eyes as she checks her tightly held cards and slides a white chip sharply forward with her index finger.
At breakfast she eats the same cereal I eat, using the two-per-cent milk I prefer; her orange juice, like mine, has lots of pulp; at the mall, she chooses the same brand of running shoe, with mesh nylon uppers and antimicrobial insoles; our umbrellas match; our sunglasses are identical; when I tell her my childhood memory of running toward a rainbow in a field of high grass, she recounts the same memory.
Once, when life was too much for me, when I needed to get away from it all, I drove north for five hours to a drizzly seaside town, where I took the last ferry to an island with a rocky shore before a dense forest, in which stood a single cabin without a telephone.
When I opened the door and held up my lantern, a raccoon leaped from the table; bats swept across the ceiling; pinecones lay everywhere; on a wooden chair I saw her purse.
A sword in my bed divides me from my eighth wife.
If I love her, I must not touch her; to do so would be to violate a vow that she herself has exacted.
True to my word, I remain inches from her, sick with desire.
My plight would be lessened if I were never to share my bed with her, but my eighth wife insists that she lives solely for these moments.
Mindful of my suffering, which is also hers, she sometimes conceals her body from me, slipping between the sheets with her quilted down coat zipped up to her chin.
At other times, suffering for my suffering, and desiring to reward my feat of denial with the one pleasure she can permit, she'll adorn herself with blue-green eyeshadow, purple-black mascara, crimson lipstick, expensive oils, creams, and lotions, and dabs of perfume behind the ears and on each wrist, and display herself, on her side of the sword, in shimmering and translucent underclothes in a variety of fashionable styles.
It's possible, of course, that my eighth wife wishes only that I'd violate my vow, despite her assurance that to do so would be to destroy her love for me by making her lose respect for my word.
How else to explain her presence in my bed, her provocative underclothes, her frequent headaches, her prolonged sighs?
Indeed, it's tempting to believe that the real test isn't whether I can demonstrate my love for her by remaining true to my word but whether I love her fiercely enough to smash through an arbitrary prohibition--an event she secretly desires and desperately awaits.
But the very temptation of this thought is a warning: in my state of violent desire, dare I trust an idea that encourages me to betray my word and to side with the passion I'm struggling to overcome?
It's also true that, despite my suffering, I'm proud of my success in keeping my word; to succumb to temptation would be to experience a loss of self-esteem.
Is she perhaps desirable to me only insofar as I'm able to overcome desire?
In that case it's I who have encouraged her to exact my vow, it's I alone who am the source of my torment.
Sometimes a strange longing comes: to plunge the sharp sword deep, deep into my eighth wife's side.
In this desire to be rid of her and thereby end my suffering, I detect a secret flaw.
My suffering, however painful, is always qualified by the possibility of failure, the possibility that, despite everything, I'll become like other men and break my word at last; her death, by removing that possibility, would remove the sole thought that relieves my anguish.
For all these reasons, I understand with terrible clarity that my plight can never change.
In this understanding I sense a final danger: by believing that nothing can change, do I not relax my will, do I not open myself all the more to temptation?
And with a last, desperate burst of strength I rouse myself to new rigors of wariness.
There are times when I can't bear the company of anyone but my ninth wife, despite the little secret we never discuss.
What does it matter to me if, bending to gaze into her brilliant dark eyes, I see her looking a little to the left or right, so that I have to shift my position slightly to create the illusion that we're gazing deep into each other's eyes?
Sometimes, as she crosses the room with her graceful strides, she'll happen to knock against me if I'm not quick enough to step out of the way.
On these occasions she doesn't stop, doesn't acknowledge me, and the slight smile on her lips remains unchanged.
In every way my ninth wife is cheerful and obliging.
Why then should I complain if, holding out my hand lovingly to lead her toward the bed, I see her stare past me?
Why should I give it a second thought if she steps on my foot as she walks to the bed alone and lies down with her little smile?
Once, as I was about to plunge my face into the thickets of her hair, I was stopped by a faint sound that appeared to be coming from her throat.
When I bent my ear against her neck, I heard a dim whirring.
A small adjustment proved necessary, after which, despite the interruption, I was able to devote myself entirely to the pleasures of the dark.
In an atmosphere of drawn curtains, medicinal smells, and perpetual twilight, I visit my tenth wife, who's burning up.
Her cheeks are flushed, her eyes are unnaturally bright; on the dark coverlet her pale arm has the whiteness of bone.
Illness consumes her.
Fever parches her lips, burns along her throat and eyelids; her ears are hot.
Her straw-colored hair, brown in the dusk and uncombed, streams on the pillow.
Her hair was once straight and obedient, but illness has released a hidden wildness: it falls in snarls and tangles, plunges over the pillow edge, tumbles along the bedspread, where it lies sprawled and spent.
I've brought her a few violets and marigolds, picked from our garden, but when she strains to raise herself, lines of tension crease her forehead, as if she's struggling against two hands holding her shoulders down; after a while she gives up and falls back, exhausted.
I lay the flowers on the bedside table, near the digital clock.
A glass of water, decorated with orange and green fish, stands on the table beside a box of tissues.
When I hold the glass to her mouth, she drinks eagerly, desperately; suddenly she turns her head away.
Water flashes on her face like a wound.
I wipe her lips with a tissue; they're cracked like dry leather.
With my fingertips I stroke her hot, pale forearm, her bony cheeks.
Under her fevered eyelids her large eyes glitter.
I want to comfort my tenth wife, I want to lavish her with attentions, but there's little I can do except sit on the chair next to the bed.
In this dusky room, in this world removed from the world, I feel myself bursting with health.
My vigor strikes me as intolerable, like a shrill, continual noise.
What to do?
Her illness excludes me--since she cannot be well, I have to become sick.
Slowly I bend down and kiss her dry, hot mouth.
I want to inhale her fiery germs, I want to drink her fever, feel her disease glowing inside me like hot spiced wine.
Deftly I slip under the heavy covers, releasing an odor of stale bedsheets.
Am I mistaken, or do I sense a slight soreness in my throat?
My forehead feels hot.
Is it my imagination, or has my hand grown pale?
I will find her, I'll join her at last in her own land.
Eagerly I meet her gaze.
Her eyes, weary and glittering, stare at me as one might stare at a sudden animal across a stream.
Whenever there's work to be done, when things can't be put off a second longer, I turn to my eleventh wife, who knows exactly what to do.
It's she who climbs the tall ladder and fastens the loose gutters in place, lifting her hammer into the blue sky as she plucks a gutter nail from between her teeth, while down on the grass I steady the ladder rails with both hands.