Mastiff
Earlier, on the trail, they'd seen it.
The massive dog.
Tugging at its master's leash, so that the young man's calves bulged with muscle as he fought to hold the dog back.
Grunting what sounded like "Damn, Rob-roy! Damn dog!" in a tone of exasperated affection.
Signs along the trail forbade dogs without leashes.
At least this dog was on a leash.
The woman stared at the animal, not twelve feet away, wheezing and panting.
Its head was larger than hers, with a pronounced black muzzle, bulging glassy eyes.
Its jaws were powerful and slack; its large, long tongue, as rosy-pink as a sexual organ, dripped slobber.
The dog was pale-brindle-furred, with a deep chest, strong shoulders and legs, a taut tail.
It must have weighed at least two hundred pounds.
Its breathing was damply audible, unsettling.
The dog's straggly-bearded young master, in beige hoodie, khaki cargo shorts, and hiking boots, gripped the leather leash with both hands, squinting at the woman, and at the man behind her, with an expression that seemed apologetic or defensive; or maybe, the woman thought, the young man was laughing at them, ordinary hikers without a monster-dog to pull and strain at their arms.
The woman thought, That isn't a dog.
It's a human being on its hands and knees!
Such surreal thoughts bombarded the woman's brain, waking and sleeping.
As long as no one else knew about them, she paid them little heed.
Fortunately, the dog and its owner were taking another trail into Wildcat Canyon.
The dog lunged forward eagerly, sniffing at the ground, the young man following with muttered curses.
The woman and her male companion continued on the main trail, which was three miles uphill, into the sun, to Wildcat Peak.
The man, sensing the woman's unease at the sight of the dog, made some joke, which the woman couldn't quite hear and did not acknowledge.
They were walking single file, the woman in the lead.
She waited for the man to touch her shoulder, as another man might have done, to reassure her, but she knew that he would not, and he did not.
Instead, the man said, in a tone of slight reproof, that the dog was an English mastiff- "Beautiful dog."
Much of what the man said to the woman, she understood, was in rebuke of her narrow judgment, her timorous ways.
Sometimes the man was amused by these qualities.
At other times, she saw in his face an expression of startled disapproval, veiled contempt.
The woman said, over her shoulder, with a wild little laugh, "Yes! Beautiful."
The hike had been the man's suggestion.
Or, rather, in his oblique way, which was perhaps a strategy of shyness, he'd simply told her that he was going hiking this weekend, and asked if she wanted to join him.
He had not risked being rejected; he'd made it clear that he would be going, regardless.
The woman had been introduced to the man seven weeks earlier, at a dinner party at a mutual friend's home in the Berkeley Hills.
The friend, closer to the man than to the woman, had said to the man, "You'll like Mariella. You'll like her face," and to the woman, "Simon's an extraordinary person, but it may not be evident immediately.
Give him time."
The woman and the man had gone on several walks together already.
But a hike of such ambition seemed, to the woman, something quite different.
She'd said, "Yes! I'd love that."
It was late afternoon.
They had been hiking for several hours, and were now making their way single file down the mountain.
The woman was descending first, then the man.
The man, the more experienced hiker, wanted to watch over the woman, whom he didn't trust not to hurt herself.
She'd surprised him by wearing lightweight running shoes on the trail and not, as he was wearing, hiking boots.
She hadn't thought to bring water, either.
He carried a twenty-ounce plastic bottle of water for them both.
The man was a little annoyed by the woman. Yet he was drawn to her.
He hoped to like her more than he did- he hoped to adore her.
He had been very lonely for too long and had come to bitterly resent the solitude of his life.
It had been an unnaturally balmy day for late March.
At midday, the temperature was perhaps sixty-eight degrees.
But now, as the sun sank like a broken bloody egg, darkness and cold began to rise from the earth.
The day before, the man had suggested to the woman that she bring a light canvas jacket in her backpack; he knew how quickly the mountain trail could turn cold in the late afternoon, but she had worn just a sweater, jeans, and a sun visor. (The woman's eyes were sensitive to sunlight, even with sunglasses.
She hated how easily they watered, tears running down her cheeks like an admission of weakness.) And she'd confounded the man by not bringing a backpack at all, with the excuse that she hated feeling "burdened."
In the gathering chill, the woman was shivering.
The trail had looped upward through pine woods to a spectacular view at the peak, where the man had given the woman some water to drink.
Though she said she wasn't thirsty, he insisted.
There's a danger of dehydration when you've been exerting yourself, he said.
He spoke sternly, as if he were a parent she could not reasonably oppose.
He spoke with the confidence of one who is rarely challenged.
At times, the woman quite liked his air of authority; other times, she resented it.
The man seemed always to be regarding her with a bemused look, like a scientist confronted with a curious specimen.
She didn't want to think- yet she thought, compulsively- that he was comparing her with other women he'd known, and finding her lacking.
Then the man took photographs with his new camera, while the woman gazed out at the view.
Along the horizon was a rim of luminous blue- the Pacific Ocean, miles away.
In the near distance were small lakes, streams.
The hills were strangely sculpted, like those bald slopes in the paintings of Thomas Hart Benton.
Absorbed in his photography, the man seemed to forget about the woman.
How self-contained he could be, how maddening!
The woman had never been so at repose in her self.
For nearly an hour, he lingered, taking photographs.
During this time, other hikers came and went.
The woman spoke briefly with these hikers, while the man appeared oblivious of them.
It wasn't his habit, he'd told her, to strike up conversations with "random" people.
"Why not?" she'd asked.
And he'd said, with a look that suggested that her question was virtually incomprehensible, "Why not? Because I'll never see them again."
With her provocative little laugh, the woman had said, "But that's the best reason for talking to strangers- you'll never see them again."
At least the bearded young man with the English mastiff hadn't climbed to the top of Wildcat Peak, though other hikers with dogs had made their way there.
A succession of dogs, in fact, of all sizes and breeds, fortunately most of them well behaved and disinclined to bark, several of them trailing their masters, older dogs, looking chastised, winded.
"Nice dog!
What's his name?" the woman would ask.
Or, "What breed is he?"
She understood that the man had taken note of her fear of the mastiff at the start of the hike.
How she'd tensed at the sight of the ugly wheezing beast.
It had to be the largest dog she'd ever seen, as big as a St. Bernard but totally lacking that dog's benign shaggy aura.
And so at the peak the woman made a point of engaging dog owners in conversations, in a bright, airy, friendly way.
She even petted the gentler dogs.
As a child of nine or ten, she'd been attacked by a German shepherd.
She'd done nothing to provoke the attack and could only remember screaming and trying to run as the dog barked furiously at her and snapped at her bare legs.
Only the intervention of adults had saved her.
The woman hadn't told the man much about her past.
Not yet.
And possibly wouldn't.
Her principle was Never reveal your weakness.
Especially to strangers: this was essential.
Technically, the woman and the man were "lovers," but they were not yet intimate.
You might say- the woman might have said- that they were still, fundamentally, strangers to each other.
They'd been together in the woman's house, upstairs in her bed, but they hadn't yet spent an entire night together.
The man felt self-conscious in the woman's house, and the woman hadn't been able to fall asleep beside him; the physical fact of him was so distracting.
Naked and horizontal, the man seemed much larger than he did clothed and vertical.
He breathed loudly, wetly, through his open mouth, and though he woke affably when she nudged him, the woman hadn't wanted to keep waking him.
In truth, the woman had never been very comfortable with a man at close quarters, unless she'd been drinking.
But this man scarcely drank.
And the woman no longer lost herself in drink; that life was behind her.
The woman liked to tell her friends that she wanted not to get married but to be married.
She wanted a relationship that seemed mature, if not old and settled, from the start.
Newness and rawness did not appeal to her.
"Excuse me? When do you think we might head back?" She spoke to the man hesitantly, not wanting to break his concentration.
In their relationship, she had not yet displayed any impatience; she had not yet raised her voice.
At last, the man put his camera, a heavy, complicated instrument, into his backpack, along with the water bottle, which contained just two or three inches of water now- "We might need this later."
His movements were measured and deliberate, as if he were alone, and the woman felt a sudden stab of dislike for him, anger that he could take such care with trivial matters and yet did not seem to love her.
There were no rest rooms on the damn trail, of course.
These were serious hiking trails, for serious hikers.
Longingly, the woman recalled the facilities at the trailhead.
How long would it take to hike back down?
An hour?
Two?
For male hikers, stopping to urinate in the woods was no great matter; for female hikers, an effort and an embarrassment.
Not since she was a young girl, trapped on an endless, hateful hike in summer camp in the Adirondacks, had she been forced to relieve herself in the woods.
The memory was hazy and blurred with shame, and humiliation at the very pettiness of her discomfort.
If she'd told this story to the man, he would probably have laughed at her.
Driving to the park that day, the man and the woman had felt very happy together.
It sometimes happened to them, unpredictably- a sudden flaring up of happiness, even joy, in each other's company.
The man was unusually talkative.
The woman laughed at his remarks, surprised that he could be so witty.
She was touched that, a few days before, he'd visited the art gallery she ran, and purchased a small soapstone sculpture.
The woman slid over in the passenger's seat, to sit closer to the man, as a young girl might do, impulsively.
How natural this felt- a rehearsal of intimacy!
The car radio was playing a piano piece by the Czech composer Jana?ek, "In the Mists."
The woman recognized it after a few notes.
She'd played the piano cycle as a girl.
Her eyes filled with tears as she remembered.