Something Like Happy
The first time I saw Arthur McKechnie, he came into the bank with some checks.
I had just started working there, fresh out of school and a bit nervous, I suppose, and I liked the way he behaved, all polite and quietly spoken, which was more than I could have said for some of the other customers.
By the end of that first, almost wordless transaction, I had already decided he was someone I could like, but I had also noticed that he was a bit too different, one of those men who think too much about stuff that nobody else bothers with, or don't pay enough attention to other people to understand what they might do, when push comes to shove.
As he stood there with the pen in his hand, very obviously reading the badge pinned to my lapel, I found myself wanting to shake him out of the little dream he was in.
Of course, I noticed the name the moment he handed over the paying-in slip. Arthur McKechnie.
Everybody knew the McKechnies, and most people knew they were a bad lot.
I knew them mainly because my sister Marie was going out with the worst of them.
People often told Marie that Stan McKechnie wasn't right for her, which was a mistake, because all that opposition only made her more determined to stick with him.
Besides, Stan was good-looking, if you didn't study him too closely.
Not like this Arthur, who seemed put together from a kit, all angles and mess, with an odd cast to the eyes and a mouth that didn't look altogether finished, like the mouth in a kid's drawing.
I didn't know then that he was Stan's little brother. Marie had never mentioned an Arthur, though she talked about the McKechnie sisters all the time.
We all did.
Some people thought the McKechnie girls were even worse than their brother, if only because they were nice-looking and dressed smart and, if you didn't know them from old, you didn't see what they were capable of until it was too late.
With Stan, you knew what he was at first sight; it didn't matter how well he scrubbed up. There was a meanness in his face that you couldn't miss, unless you were Marie and wanted to miss it.
"Arthur handed over the money and the paying-in slip; then, when I had processed the transaction, he took the confirmation chit and, carefully, making no attempt to hide what he was doing, wrote down on the back what it said on my lapel badge.
He was a slow writer. He held his pen in an awkward way, between the first two fingers of his left hand, and he angled his arm round to make the letters, printing them out large: "FIONA, TRAINEE." He didn't seem to care that I could see what he was doing.
When he was done, he looked up and nodded.
"Is there anything else I can help you with today?"
I asked, not sure whether I was amused or annoyed.
He shook his head. His voice, when he talked, was soft.
"Not today, thanks," he said, with an odd, even suggestive emphasis on "today."
He smiled then; it was a tight, secretive kind of smile, but it wasn't mean, and I could see that he didn't think there was anything out of the ordinary in what he had just done.
He wasn't being smart, or impolite.
He'd just written my name on the back of his confirmation slip, the way a child would, for reasons of his own that had nothing to do with anybody else.
I wanted to say something, but I couldn't find the right words. I just shook my head ever so slightly and looked out to the line for the next customer-and Arthur McKechnie turned to go, that inward little smile on his face, a smile that I could see even then was the sign not only of a secret happiness but also of his inevitable fall.
I'm not saying I knew what that fall would be, or claiming that I had some kind of premonition; God knows human beings are made for falling, and most human beings in that town were going to fall sooner rather than later.
But I did see something out of the ordinary, and I'm sorry now that I didn't take more notice.
I asked Marie about Arthur when I got home that night.
She was preoccupied, getting ready to go out with Stan, so I thought she'd just shrug it off, but she stopped putting on her makeup and sat looking at my reflection in the mirror, her eyeliner suspended in midair.
"Arthur?" she said.
"Where did you come across him, for God's sake?"
"He came into the bank today," I said.
"Oh, yeah?"
Her hand dropped and she grimaced.
"Well, don't be getting interested in him.
Stan says he's a nutter."
"So who is he, then?"
I said, picking up some clothes that were scattered around the place.
I was always picking up after Marie, even now, when we didn't share a room anymore.
"He's Stan's brother, of course," she said.
"He's really pissed Stan off, though."
"Oh."
I folded her powder-blue sweater and put it away in the chest of drawers.
"Why's that?"
"Something to do with money," she said. She watched as I gathered up a pile of obvious laundry.
"Why?
You're not really interested, are you?"
I snorted. "Of course not," I said. "I just don't remember you ever mentioning that Stan had a brother."
"Yeah, well."
A worried look crossed her face.
"There's not much to talk about.
I hardly noticed him at first.
He's hardly ever there when I go round.
When he is, he just sits in a corner, reading." The thought of it made her shiver.
"Stan's old man says Arthur's not a real McKechnie.
He says Margaret must have got him from some tinker woman she met outside the off-license."
She started working on her makeup again.
"It might even be true, for all I know.
I mean, he's nothing like Stan."
"So why is Stan annoyed with him?"
Marie shook her head.
"Search me," she said.
"Anyway, I've got to hurry.
I'm going to be late."
I studied her as she applied the finishing touches to her face.
She wasn't pretty, but she tried hard.
She had been working on the assembly line for three years, and though she would never have admitted it, she was jealous of me, having a good job at the bank.
For her, that meant I had a future.
Of course, I couldn't tell her that a future didn't mean as much to me as she thought it did.
It was a good job, and everybody said I should be grateful; most girls from my background ended up with no prospects, just eight hours a day on the assembly line.
People were always saying how lucky I was, as if I had won the lottery or something.
"Where are you going, anyway?" I asked.
She stood up and gave a little twirl.
"No idea," she said.
"I don't think Stan's got any money."
"Well," I said.
"Maybe he should ask Arthur for a loan."
I smiled sweetly.
"Ha-ha," she said.
"Very funny."
Marie had never thought much of me, or my taste, when it came to matters of the heart.
It was probably fair to say that I was better-looking than her, and the teachers at school had always referred to me as the smart one, but it's no big secret that, with boys, giving out the right signals matters more than looks or brains.
Just before this, I'd been going out with a boy called Jack, but when it didn't work out I felt an odd relief, as if I'd been released from the need to maintain some minor but time-consuming pretense.
Marie had always liked the idea of love; even at nine, she'd had a boyfriend, a kid called Tony Ross, who gave her cards at Christmas and on her birthday.
All through her early teens, she had very obviously liked boys, and they had liked her, mostly because boys like to be liked.
For Marie, intelligence in a boyfriend was the worst kind of liability, and the few boys I did bring home knew how to write their own names and do basic arithmetic, at the very least.
Which was more than anybody could say for Stan, and this was one of the reasons that my father got so angry with Marie a few days after I met Arthur, before he left for his shift at the works.
"Stan McKechnie will never amount to anything," he said, in his customary, quiet but final style.
"He can't keep a job, he doesn't know how to handle money, he wants something for nothing.
Someday he'll find out that the world doesn't owe him a living.
You steer clear of him, you hear?"
Marie always seemed genuinely surprised that people thought so ill of Stan; after all, she would say, the McKechnies weren't the worst people on the estate, not by a long way.
Stan had been unlucky: his mum had died when he was at a vulnerable age, and his sisters had spoiled him rotten.
His dad was a bit of a rogue, everybody knew that, a rogue with a liking for the bottle, but Stan was doing the best he could, and he had big plans.
He just needed a break, that was all.
Of course, it was sad listening to her talk like that, and I'm not sure she even convinced herself much of the time.
The fact was that after she had chosen Stan she couldn't have let go, even if she'd wanted to.
She didn't want to have to admit she had made a mistake; she couldn't be seen to give in to pressure.
Even when the rumor about Bobby Curran started going around, she refused to believe that Stan was involved.