Foster
Early on a Sunday, after first Mass in Clonegal, my father, instead of taking me home, drives deep into Wexford toward the coast, where my mother's people came from.
It is a hot August day, bright, with patches of shade and greenish sudden light along the road.
We pass through the village of Shillelagh, where my father lost our red shorthorn in a game of forty-five, and on past the mart in Carnew, where the man who won her sold her not long afterward.
My father throws his hat on the passenger seat, winds down the window, and smokes.
I shake the plaits out of my hair and lie flat on the back seat, looking up through the rear window.
I wonder what it will be like, this place belonging to the Kinsellas. I see a tall woman standing over me, making me drink milk still hot from the cow.
I see another, less likely version of her, in an apron, pouring pancake batter into a frying pan, asking would I like another, the way my mother sometimes does when she is in good humor.
The man will be her size. He will take me to town on the tractor and buy me red lemonade and crisps.
Or he'll make me clean out sheds and pick stones and pull ragweed and docks out of the fields.
I wonder if they live in an old farmhouse or a new bungalow, whether they will have an outhouse or an indoor bathroom, with a toilet and running water.
An age, it seems, passes before the car slows and turns in to a tarred, narrow lane, then slams over the metal bars of a cattle grid.
On either side, thick hedges are trimmed square.
At the end of the lane, there's a white house with trees whose limbs are trailing the ground.
"Da," I say. "The trees."
"What about them?"
"They're sick," I say.
"They're weeping willows," he says, and clears his throat.
On the housefront, tall, shiny windowpanes reflect our coming.
I see myself looking out from the back seat, as wild as a tinker's child, with my hair all undone, but my father, at the wheel, looks just like my father.
A big, loose hound lets out a few rough, halfhearted barks, then sits on the step and looks back at the doorway, where the man has come out to stand.
He has a square body like the men my sisters sometimes draw, but his eyebrows are white, to match his hair.
He looks nothing like my mother's people, who are all tall, with long arms, and I wonder if we have not come to the wrong house.
"Dan," he says, and tightens himself. "What way are you?"
"John," Da says.
They stand looking out over the yard for a moment and then they are talking rain: how little rain there is, how the priest in Kilmuckridge prayed for rain this very morning, how a summer like this was never before known.
There is a pause, during which my father spits, and then the conversation turns to the price of cattle, the E.E.C., butter mountains, the cost of lime and sheep-dip.
I am used to it, this way men have of not talking: they like to kick a divot out of the grass with a boot heel, to slap the roof of a car before it takes off, to sit with their legs wide apart, as though they do not care.
When the woman comes out, she pays no heed to the men.
She is even taller than my mother, with the same black hair, but hers is cut tight like a helmet.
She's wearing a printed blouse and brown, flared trousers.
The car door is opened and I am taken out, and kissed.
"The last time I saw you, you were in the pram," she says, and stands back, expecting an answer.
"The pram's broken."
"What happened at all?"
"My brother used it for a wheelbarrow and the wheel fell off."
She laughs and licks her thumb and wipes something off my face.
I can feel her thumb, softer than my mother's, wiping whatever it is away.
When she looks at my clothes, I see my thin cotton dress, my dusty sandals through her eyes.
Neither one of us knows what to say. A queer, ripe breeze is crossing the yard.
"Come on in, a leanbh."
She leads me into the house.
There's a moment of darkness in the hallway; when I hesitate, she hesitates with me.
We walk through into the heat of the kitchen, where I am told to sit down, to make myself at home.
Under the smell of baking, there's some disinfectant, some bleach.
She lifts a rhubarb tart out of the oven and puts it on the bench.
Pale-yellow roses are as still as the jar of water they are standing in.
"So how is your mammy keeping?"
"She won a tenner on the prize bonds."
"She did not."
"She did," I say. "We all had jelly and ice cream and she bought a new tube for the bicycle."
I feel, again, the steel teeth of the comb against my scalp earlier that morning, the strength of my mother's hands as she wove my plaits tight, her belly at my back, hard with the next baby.
I think of the clean pants she packed in the suitcase, the letter, and what she must have written. Words had passed between my mother and my father:
"How long should they keep her?"
"Can't they keep her as long as they like?"
"Is that what I'll say?"
"Say what you like.
Isn't it what you always do."
Now the woman fills an enamel jug with milk.
"Your mother must be busy."
"She's waiting for them to come and cut the hay."
"Have ye not the hay cut?" she says. "Aren't ye late?"
As the men come in from the yard, it grows momentarily dark, then brightens once again when they sit down.
"Well, Missus," Da says, pulling out a chair.
"Dan," she says, in a different voice.
"There's a scorcher of a day."
" 'Tis hot, surely."
She turns her back to watch the kettle, waiting.
"Wasn't it a great year for the hay all the same. Never saw the like of it," Da says. "The loft is full to capacity. I nearly split my head on the rafters pitching it in."
I wonder why my father lies about the hay.
He is given to lying about things that would be nice, if they were true.
Somewhere farther off, someone has started up a chainsaw and it drones on like a big, stinging wasp for a while.
I wish I was out there, working.
I am unused to sitting still and do not know what to do with my hands.
Part of me wants my father to leave me here while another wants him to take me back, to what I know.
I am in a spot where I can neither be what I always am nor turn into what I could be.
The kettle rumbles up to the boiling point, its steel lid clapping.
Kinsella gets a stack of plates from the cupboard, opens a drawer and takes out knives and forks, teaspoons.
He opens a jar of beetroot and puts it on a saucer with a little serving fork, leaves out sandwich spread and salad cream.
Already there's a bowl of tomatoes and onions, chopped fine, a fresh loaf, ham, a block of red cheddar.
"And what way is Mary?" the woman says.
"Mary?
She's coming near her time."
"I suppose the last babby is getting hardy?"
"Aye," Da says.
"He's crawling.
It's feeding them that's the trouble. There's no appetite like a child's and, believe you me, this one is no different."
"Ah, don't we all eat in spurts, the same as we grow," the woman says, as though this is something he should know.
"She'll ate but you can work her."
Kinsella looks up at his wife. "There'll be no need for any of that," he says. "The child will have no more to do than help Edna around the house."
"We'll keep the child gladly," the woman echoes. "She's welcome here."
When we sit in at the table, Da tastes the ham and reaches for the beetroot.
He doesn't use the serving fork but pitches it onto the plate with his own.
It stains the pink ham, bleeds.
Tea is poured.
There's a patchy silence as we eat, our knives and forks breaking up what's on our plates.
After some little scraps of speech, the tart is cut. Cream falls over the hot pastry, into warm pools.
Now that my father has delivered me and eaten his fill, he is anxious to light his fag and get away.
Always, it's the same: he never stays in any place long after he's eaten, not like my mother, who would talk until it grew dark and light again. This, at least, is what my father says. I have never known it to happen.
With my mother it is all work: us, the butter-making, the dinners, the washing up and getting up and getting ready for Mass and school, weaning calves, and hiring men to plow and harrow the fields, stretching the money and setting the alarm for a time before the sun rises.
But this is a different type of house. Here there is room to think. There may even be money to spare.
"I'd better hit the road," Da says.
"What hurry is on you?" Kinsella says.
"The daylight is burning, and I've yet the spuds to spray."
"There's no fear of blight these evenings," the woman says, but she gets up anyway, and goes out the back door with a sharp knife.
A silence climbs between the men while she is gone.
"Give this to Mary," she says, coming in. "I'm snowed under with rhubarb, whatever kind of year it is."
My father takes the rhubarb from her, but it is as awkward as the baby in his arms.
A stalk falls to the floor and then another.
He waits for her to pick them up, to hand them to him. She waits for him to do it himself.
In the end, it's Kinsella who stoops.
"There now," he says.
Out in the yard, my father throws the rhubarb onto the back seat, gets in behind the wheel, and starts the engine.
"Good luck to ye," he says. "I hope this girl will give no trouble."
He turns to me. "Try not to fall into the fire, you."
I watch him reverse, turn in to the lane, and drive away.
Why did he leave without so much as a goodbye or ever mentioning when he would come back for me?
"What's ailing you, child?" the woman says.
I look at my feet, dirty in my sandals.
Kinsella stands in close. "Whatever it is, tell us. We won't mind."
"Lord God Almighty, didn't he go and forget all about your wee bits and bobs!" the woman says.
"No wonder you're in a state. Well, hasn't he a head like a sieve, the same man."
"Not a word about it," Kinsella says. "We'll have you togged out in no time."
When I follow the woman back inside, I want her to say something, to put me at ease.
Instead, she clears the table, picks up the sharp knife, and stands at the window, washing the blade under the running tap.
She stares at me as she wipes it clean and puts it away.
"Now, girleen," she says. "I think it's nearly time you had a bath."
She takes me upstairs to a bathroom, plugs the drain, and turns the taps on full.
"Hands up," she says, and pulls my dress off.