Flowers
"I suppose every Englishman loves flowers."
Even at the beginning Mary Ryan winced when she heard Phil Harding say that.
In the course of time she came to wince habitually, for he seldom saw a vase of flowers without saying it and she, for her part, could not live in London without flowers.
He said it with a dewy self-righteousness, implying that Latins, Celts, Iberians, Tartars, etc, even if loving flowers, did not love them as the flowers would appreciate being loved- whereas to see his nose descending, so well developed and stalwart, would cast a rose into rapture.
Now she repeated the words in Phil's voice, and as she did so one of the zinnias, top-heavy on its stiff stalk, lurched hysterically out of the bowl.
It was the season of zinnias, of late stocks and early gladiolus, the season when flower-shop flowers assert themselves with post-midsummer masterfulness and opulence, and the season when Phil came back from inspecting Cheshire and Lancashire.
Phil was employed by Multibev, Ltd, a combine firm that manufactured soft drinks and confectionery, ran low-price restaurants all over Britain and went in heavily for welfare and morality.
It was because of Multibev, Ltd, that Phil could so rarely stay the night.
A Welfare Manager in a firm employing so many young girls should be for choice a married man, but could never be a divorced one.
And at the beginning, when she was so madly in love, Multibev seemed like a Moloch, sullenly devouring all youth, pleasure and romance, chewing down talent and joy of life into a dull paste, chewing down, in particular, that being of glorious power and promise, Philip Harding.
It was Multibev that she blamed for everything: for prudence, restrictions, frustrations, telegrams saying REGRET IMPOSSIBLE, guarded letters or letters less guarded but headed P.B. for Please Burn, the alarm-clock ticking beside the enamoured bed.
She even blamed Multibev for the reputed resentfulness of Mrs. Harding.
If Mrs. Harding had not been crushed into respectability by Multibev she would have understood and been reasonable.
Afterwards, by an ignominious decline, she found herself regarding Multibev as a clumsy species of Cupid, blindly promoting her love.
For as Phil worked up in the firm he became busier and busier and simultaneously more devoted to Sundays and public holidays, and to his suburban garden, and seldom came to her flat except when one of his tours of inspection impelled him.
Then, between returning to London and going down to Surbition, he could give her a few hours.
Such a few hours was now impending.
Garaging his car (it would not do for the car to be seen outside) Phil would come on by bus, and then on foot, to Elworthy Mansions, and the escalator would hoist him to her door. The bell would ring (long ago, when he had refused to take the duplicate latch-key she had cut for him, it had been a week's tragedy), she would open the door, he would fill up the narrow entry; and then, according to circumstances, he would put down his umbrella and kiss her, or kiss her and put down his umbrella.
Then he would want to wash.
Today he might even want to wash between putting down the umbrella and kissing her. For the day was both sultry and gritty.
"You can sit there and be lovable, whether you like it or not," said Mary Ryan to the zinnia, which she had now replaced in the bowl.
A gust of thundery wind blew the decency-curtain inward.
It caught on the prickles of the cactus which stood on the window-sill, and as it receded, drawing the cactus after it, the pot heeled over and fell on the floor.
When she had swept up the earth, the plant, and the potsherds, she hurled the whole thing out of the window.
And for a minute she felt much the better for this, lightened and solaced, and almost gay.
Then she began to feel irked by a sense of something lacking.
She had always kept a potted plant on the window-sill.
Now there wasn't one.
Instead she tried the effect of a fruit-dish, and then of a glass jug filled with water, and then, abstractedly, of the mincing-machine.
The mincing-machine was almost right. It looked carefree, and like a Picasso.
"Woman ascending scaffold," she said to herself.
But none of these expedients quite satisfied her, so she went out to buy another cactus.
The diversion of dressing for the street eased her mind.
But outside Elworthy Mansions, with the swooning asphalt underfoot and the honk of klaxons battering her ears, she experienced a violent self-disgust.
Going out to buy another window-plant . . .
What sort of fidgeting old maid had she become that she could not endure the removal of one bar from her cage?
Old maid, old maid! . . . that was what it had made of her.
Full of gloom and malice she entered the flower-shop and chose a potted balsam, and had it put down to her account.
Then, leaving the shop, she had her idea, and turned back.
"I want a bunch of lilies," she said, "and some gladiolus.
Two dozen, I think, the pale pink ones.
No, make it three dozen, and put in some yellow ones, too.
And a bunch of those big white peonies, and a dozen pink carnations, and a dozen yellow ones.
And what roses have you?"
The assistant showed her dark red roses and narrow flame-coloured roses, but she rejected them.
Pink, she said.
The assistant remembered some cabbagey pink roses reposing in a bucket behind the staging.
"They have just come in," she said falsely. "Old England they are called."
"They will do perfectly," said Mary Ryan. "Put in three bunches.
And now I want a card."
On the card she wrote in scrawly capitals: To Greet You.
"Here you are.
Put this with the flowers and send them to Philip Harding, Glencoe, 19, Westland Road, Surbiton.
They must be there before five o'clock."
"I am not sure that we can promise that," said the assistant. "It's rather a long way out of town. We don't normally deliver to Surbiton.
Of course we could send them by special messenger."
"Yes, that will do," she said.
Overwhelming her eyes with a farewell glance at those glistening bridal tints, she walked from the shop.
"Your balsam, madam.
Don't forget your balsam."
On her return she put the balsam on the window-sill where the cactus had been, and sat down to admire the pure cool green, translucent like jade, of the fleshy stems, and the light shining through them.
In its brief, rich life the balsam is of all flowers the most innocently sensual: too innocent, even, to have thought of perfume.
She was still gazing at the balsam when the bell rang.
She switched on the electric kettle (he would want a cup of tea; the hotter the day the more devotedly Phil wanted tea), and then let him in.
He put down his umbrella.
Good heavens, how tall he was, how well made and how well kept!
It would be a calamity to Multibev to lose him just now, when his hair was growing so beautifully grey.
But they would not lose him, for no woman, however set on it, can get a divorce on the strength of two guineas-worth of flowers and a scrawly anonymity.
Besides, Dilys Harding was not in the least set on it.
"Can I wash?" he said presently.
"Of course, darling.
Have a bath if you like."
As though he were a stranger, as though he were a new lover, entirely new and incalculable, she listened to taps turned on and off, to splashing water and water running away, and measured the interminable interval during which he dried his hands.
Reappearing, he went straight to the bowl of zinnias.
"I wonder how they grow them as large as this.
Lovely things, aren't they?
Look at this one, now, what a colour it is!
And this."
"You always look at my flowers first," she said.
"They lead up to you, you see.
Besides. . . I suppose every Englishman loves flowers.
But I always say that, don't I?"
"Generally."
"One day, I'm afraid you'll get tired of me- of me, and my umbrella, and all the other things you laugh at."